IAIN PEARS's new novel "Arcadia" comes as a 600-page hardback, as befits the current trend for literary doorstoppers. But that's not how the book was conceived and written. "Arcadia" the app, came first, and is another creature altogether. The e-novel gathers up ten characters in three different worlds, and presents them as a skein of coloured, intersecting lines. Short bursts of text propel the characters onward, or across into another storyline: the choice depends upon the reader.

This is not a standard "choose your adventure" book, however. Mr Pears, the best-selling author of "An Instance of the Fingerpost", had a more radical project in mind. What is unique about "Arcadia"—and intriguing as an experiment in interactive fiction—is the fact that each reader experiences the story differently. Mr Pears controls the story universe, but how readers weave the three tales—pastoral utopia, 1950s Oxford and dystopian future—is deeply individual. "There are readers who are 'acrossers' and others who are 'up and downers'," says Henry Volans, director of Faber Press, a division of the app's publisher, Faber & Faber. "It's meant to be a rabbit hole that encourages all sorts of reading."

Until now, most e-reading has been static, or pepped up with audio or video enhancements. Mr Pears's attempt to break from the physical page is subtle, but nonetheless bold. His time-travelling tale is, among other things, a metafictional meditation on storytelling. What is cause, what effect? Do we make our stories, or do our stories make us? Its digital form brilliantly expresses the parallels, overlapping paths and coincidences that are his story's subject. Reading forward, then doubling back, following a different character to a point where many paths cross, the reader experiences the same events through multiple eyes. Recognition brings a satisfying shock: a sort of enhanced déjà vu, as the story solders itself in the mind.

"Arcadia" is all the more noteworthy for the fact that large publishers have largely given up experimenting in this realm. Most have turned away from costly innovations that have not paid off, like enhanced e-books, focusing instead on using digital tools to support the broader reading ecosystem. The Kindle, for its part, has stopped evolving, as the book theorist Craig Mod recently glumly noted. The market for e-readers is so saturated that Waterstones no longer stocks the devices. Publishers prefer to explore new ways to marry print and digital. Melville House has a line of "illuminated" novels with QR codes that lead to extra digital content; Picador published "The Kills" in 2013, a "digital-first" thriller that links to online films from characters' points of view. FSG's "The Silent History", a multi-author 2012 serial story in an app, is marketed now as a print novel. Random House, meanwhile, offers a straightforward series of classic stories for mobile phones called "Storycuts".

This leaves writers and artists to play digitally on their own. The first chapter of David Mitchell's new novel, "Slade House," is told in Tweet-length pulses; Jennifer Egan used the platform to serially deliver her story "Black Box". Neither, however, exploits Twitter's unique form of public conversation. The same can be said of Wattpad, a site on which writers upload works in progress; for all its millions of users, the fiction it inspires is not especially interactive. Its chief value is as a springboard, as British author Emily Benet learned when 2.2m Wattpad followers helped to land her a publishing contract.

Unsurprisingly, it is creative startups that are experimenting most boldly. The Circumstance art collective in Bristol will soon publish a new version of "These Pages Fall Like Ash", a combination of a print book and an urban-walking app that overlays an imaginary world onto the physical. "Abra" is a fine book and an app that makes poetry magically form and reform. Software developers, meanwhile, are cooking up apps that combine narrative with games. "Gone Home" is a mystery in which the reader/viewer enters an empty mansion and follows clues to unlock text that tells the story of the vanished occupants. In "Device 6", readers puzzle out a similar mystery chapter by chapter. Such "story exploration games" reveal narrative through gamelike moves, adding graphics to the text-based genre known as interactive fiction (IF).

Many believe this is the real future of electronic literature. If it's hard to imagine a truly digital novel, it is because "we already have digital narratives—they're called videogames," argues Lincoln Michel of Electric Literature, a web site. Naomi Alderman, an award-winning British novelist who is also the author of "Zombies, Run!" a jogging app that has sold 2m copies, concurs. "There's nothing like a novel to take you into the individual consciousness of a writer. But there are things that are choice-based that only video games can do."

New narrative games like the prize-winning"80 Days", based on Jules Vernes' "Around the World in Eighty Days", allow players to experience a story not just as reader, but as protagonist. In these graphically rich narrative worlds, readers both lose and gain. What's lost is our own imaginative rendering of a story world—arguably literature's most distinctive feature. But what is gained is a truly empathic connection with the protagonist. "It's about complicity," Emily Short, a noted IF writer and critic, recently observed at the London Literature Festival. "You are in the position of being the idiot going into the basement, instead of the one shouting at the screen."

Homo sapiens has always been a storytelling animal; so is homo digitalis. The difference is that in the digital environment, reading breaks the page, says Tom Abba, a scholar of digital narrative at the University of the West of England. "We're trying to nudge the reader into a new kind of relationship with the story," he says. In other words, better hold on: the digital ride is just beginning. 

MANY young feminists do not know who Gloria Steinem is, which is strange given that she has been at the forefront of women’s rights for nearly half a century. Writer, activist and organiser, Ms Steinem has been a founding member of a number of well-known institutions—the National Women’s Political Caucus, the Ms Foundation and Women Against Pornography, to name just a few. She has written extensively on inequality, from musings on “If Men Could Menstruate” to abortions and the wage gap. Barack Obama acknowledged the importance of her work by awarding her the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2013.

Ms Steinem’s memoir, “My Life on the Road”, is her first book in over 20 years. Itinerancy was a characteristic of her early years, and her book focuses on the virtues of travel. Every autumn her father would pack the family into the car and drive across America, funding the trip by bartering and selling antiques on the way. The adventures were disruptive; at first the young Ms Steinem did not go to school, learning to read from road signs and advertising billboards instead. She ate in diners so often that it became her ambition to own one. She concedes that she began to long for a “mythical neat house with conventional parents, a school I could walk to, and friends who lived nearby”.  

But there is a purpose to choosing the road as her theme, and she teases out many links between her formative experiences and her later activism. She wonders aloud whether she would “have dared to challenge rules later in life if [her] father had obeyed them”. She writes powerfully about the “gendering” of travel, and how women are warned against doing it alone. The failed adventures of women both real (Amelia Earhart) and fictional (“Thelma and Louise”) are often held up as proof of its dangers, yet statistically the home is where women are most likely to be beaten or killed; a familiar fact, if still alarming.

What is clear is that Ms Steinem’s love of the road equipped her for decades of organising and rallying. Her book is a homage to the people she has encountered and the stories that they have told her. Taxi drivers and students share pages with well-known figures such as Bobby Kennedy, Hillary Clinton and Betty Friedan.

What unites these tales is discrimination: in the workplace, in the media, in education, at home. Just as striking is what is left out. There is no mention of her important work with Linda Boreman (known as Linda Lovelace) to draw attention to the dangers of working in pornography, nor is Ms magazine (which Ms Steinem co-founded) given much attention. The book offers ideas on ways that progress may be achieved—by changing classrooms into “co-operative rather than competitive” places, for example—without suggesting how these might be implemented.

Flaws aside, Ms Steinem’s memoir is a history of the fight for gender equality as perceived through the lens of her own experience, and will be enjoyed by any reader interested in women’s rights. It is clear that much progress has been made, but given that abortion—a topic explored by Ms Steinem from the book’s dedication page onwards—is still at the centre of heated Supreme Court debates, “My Life on the Road” also serves as a reminder of the battles feminists have not yet won.

“EVERYTHING is always going away,” Luc Sante writes in “The Other Paris”, a moving and discursive portrait of the city’s poor and bohemian past. “Every way of life is continually subject to disappearance.” And so it would seem to be with Paris—for all that it looks, much more than many other great cities, as if it has been carefully protected from the developments of the modern world. With its stringent building regulations and beautiful boulevards, Paris can seem like a living museum. Mr Sante, conjuring a city that has survived many different kinds of violence before the terrorist attacks of November 13th, reminds the reader that this could not be further from the truth.

A Belgian writer and critic who was educated in America, Mr Sante has made it his life’s work to walk alongside those who never make it to the top of the heap. “Low Life” (1991) painted a vivid portrait of life in New York’s Lower East Side in the 19th and early 20th centuries; not for nothing was he a historical consultant on Martin Scorsese’s film, “Gangs of New York”. But New York is a city that wears its transformations on its sleeve. Paris does not, although it has been altered again and again by the twin forces of revolution and civic planning, as Mr Sante ably shows.

“The Other Paris” is no ordinary history book, though the reader will learn about Philippe-Auguste’s 12th-century city walls and how Louis XIV replaced fortifications with boulevards in the 17th century. Mr Sante is a flâneur, that uniquely French description that mixes sauntering with observing the world, revealing his subject through themes rather than chronology. “La Canaille” (a haughty word meaning “the masses”) is his chapter on the force of the crowd; “Saint Monday” takes the reader into the old drinking dens of Paris; “Le Business” reveals (is anyone surprised?) where the city’s prostitutes were to be found, and what their lives were like. In Mr Sante’s Paris there is room for everyone.

This is a book to be read with a map of the city to hand. Though beware—many of the streets to which Mr Sante refers have long since vanished. In the 19th century it was Georges-Eugène Haussmann and his team of engineers who gave Parisians the city in which they live today: after 1853 Napoléon III allowed him free rein to remake its topography almost completely. Mr Sante admits that Haussmann’s achievements were remarkable—from the construction of great parks to the installation of public urinals. But he refers too to Haussmann’s work as “depredations”, and it is clear that he mourns the huddled courtyards, alleyways and impasses that were swept away as a result.

Many of these cours des miracles—the name, Mr Sante writes, that was given in the Middle Ages to an encampment of beggars, whores and thieves—are restored to life in his text. The book takes what may be familiar, such as the origin of the idea of “bohemia” and “bohemians” in “Scènes de la Vie de Bohème” by Henri Murger, a 19th-century writer and poet, and sets it against its less glamorous origins, the “pothouses of the deep past” with names such as Les Chats en Cage (“the imprisoned cats”), Le Tombeau du Lapin (“the rabbit’s tomb”), and L’Abattoir. Some may go to Paris for its fine cuisine, but in the old market of Les Halles Mr Sante finds sellers of hot water coloured brown with carrots, burned onions and caramel; people who washed dishes in restaurants sold the leavings on diners’ plates. And Paris has always had to contend with brutality: his graphic depictions of executions in the Place de Grève, and the city’s prisons—Grand Châtelet, the Maison de la Force and the Bastille—show how tough the authorities felt they had to be.

Life in Paris, Mr Sante writes, is a game—a hard one; now the city is in “the end game played by money and power”. And yet the quality of the author’s attention to the place alone seems to indicate that he cannot quite bring himself to give up hope, and neither should the reader. This book has many illustrations, though it is a shame that often the images are too small to make much of an impact. It achieves its aim of providing “a reminder of what life was like in cities when they were as vivid and savage and uncontrollable as they were for many centuries, as expressed by Paris, the most sublime of the world’s great cities”.

“EVERYTHING is what it is, and not any other thing,” said bishop Joseph Butler. But sometimes we use language in non-literal ways to make a point. In other words, sometimes we need a metaphor: an existing image or conceptual framework repurposed to illuminate another one. Metaphors are crucial to language. We could hardly do without them.

But they also lay traps for the unwary, and policymakers should think hard before rushing to declare, as France’s president François Hollande did after last Friday’s terror attacks in Paris, that the killings constituted an “act of war”.

“War” has its uses as a metaphor. Most importantly, it focuses attention: there is no greater national emergency. War calls for urgency, unity and sacrifice. Leaders in wartime can expect a singleness of purpose from their followers that no other situation can command.


But the problem with metaphors is that—by definition—they are not the thing itself.  Metaphors are meant to highlight structural similarities between two things, but not exact similarity. Usually this is not a problem; when Tom Cochrane sang “Life is a Highway”, listeners didn’t expect petrol stations every so often. But sometimes metaphors mean different things to different people. It is important that the audience sees the same similarities you do.

When they do not, the result can be a disaster. George Bush declared a “crusade” after September 11th, 2001. By this he meant a great moral challenge—the way we use a “crusade” for any values-driven cause today. Muslims in the Middle East quickly drew other similarities: the original literal Crusades resulted in invasion and occupation of Muslim lands. So, it transpired, did Mr Bush’s crusade.

What, then, about “war”? War in its canonical form has state armies on a battlefield trying to control territory. Most of today’s shooting wars are not even that clean cut—America has not declared one officially since the second world war. But worse, politicians have been unable to resist the temptation to declare war on things like poverty (Lyndon Johnson), drugs (Ronald Reagan) or terrorism (George Bush).

Declaring such “wars” is a problem because such a war on a concept is unwinnable: poverty and drugs will never show up and sign a surrender document on the battleship Missouri, as Imperial Japan did in 1945 to end the second world war. Did Johnson defeat poverty? Did Reagan defeat drugs? We certainly know that Mr Bush did not defeat terrorism.

What about declaring war on Islamic State (IS), presumed by all to be behind the Paris massacres?  “War” is exactly the term IS would most eagerly choose. Wars are fought by armies belonging to states—just what the Islamic State fancies itself. In reality, the territory controlled by ISIS—the “caliphate”—has some elements of a state, with everything from fighting  forces to rudimentary social services, but it is unrecognised, claiming territory other states have a legitimate claim to. IS’s claim to state status is dubious. Mr Hollande runs the risk of raising that status when he calls eight men with guns and small bombs capable of “an act of war” against a nuclear power.

There is an argument to be made for denigrating the perpetrators instead of raising them to the level of soldiers fighting for their country. Mr Hollande also called the attacks “cowardly”. John Kerry, the American secretary of state, chose this tack, calling the Paris attackers “psychopathic monsters”. Vladimir Putin has called them “criminals” (after the downing of a Russian jet, apparently also by IS). This approach has its merits: the Paris shooters were opportunistic thugs, losers who got guns and took out their frustrations on innocent soft targets, not soldiers fighting armed equals on a battlefield. But the “criminal” metaphor has its own problems: the Paris killers were more than petty gangsters, and the problem is considerably more urgent than the average street crime. Like the “war” metaphor, “crime” matches only some of the facts.

Metaphors have real world consequences, as clever psycholinguistic research has shown. Too much talk of “crime” and the urgency of terrorism can be understated, as after the first small bombings of the World Trade Center. But too much talk of “war” is perhaps the bigger problem. No democratic politician can afford to look too cool-headed or cerebral in the face of enormities like Paris. But rhetoric risks working like a one-way ratchet, leaders trying to outdo each other on who is keenest to fight. Voters listen, and demands for bombings and boots on the ground (Russia and France are already bombing), which can create a feedback loop. The bad guys on the other side will gleefully respond in kind. Without anyone quite having planned it, war is no longer just a metaphor. 

LATER this week, the British government will announce its latest spending review. Its aim will be to balance the budget by 2020. In part, this is because the Conservative party genuinely believes a smaller state is good for economic growth in the long run. But is there a hard-and-fast relationship?

This is the kind of issue economists spend years researching. But your blogger pursued a simple approach; comparing the GDP per capita of OECD countries with government spending as a proportion of GDP. (Statistical purists should note; the latest figures on the former are from 2014 but the latter only go up to 2013.)

The OECD has data covering both measures for 26 countries. So step 1 was to rank the countries by government spending and then divide them into quartiles (six countries in the 1st and 4th quartiles, 7 countries in the 2nd and 3rd). The results were as follows

It is hard to spot any relationship from that grouping. As you can see, the highest spending group has roughly the same GDP per capita as the lowest spenders. The third quartile contains Luxembourg which, thanks to its huge financial services sector, has GDP per capita 50% higher than any other nation. 

We can slice the data the other way and rank the countries by GDP per capita and then see what their government spending is.

At first glance, things look more promising for the small-staters. The poorest quartile of countries has higher spending than the wealthiest. But look at the second richest quartile; it spends a lot. If you divided the whole group into two halves, then the richest countries spend 46.6% of GDP on government and the poorest 45.7%.

Now, of course, a lot more sophisticated analysis can be done, covering growth rates etc; the rate of government spending in any given year also depends on the health of the economy (thanks to unemployment benefits etc).

But this rough-and-ready analysis shows it is unwise to be too dogmatic. Most countries have a mixed economy with public and private sector involvement; more than two-thirds of governments in this sample spend between 40% and 55% of GDP. Clearly the history of communism shows that total government control is bad for growth. Sweden's experience since the 1990s suggests that a mixed economy can benefit from a reduction in the state if it becomes too large.  However, the developed world is ageing and there may be a natural tendency for government spending (on pensions, health) etc to grow larger over the next few decades. Instead of shrinking the state, government might find they are running hard to stay in the same place.


HIS supporters celebrated like the fans of a football team that had won an upset victory in a cup final. Car horns blared. Firecrackers lit up the sky. Yells of “vamos!” rang out among Buenos Aires’s Parisian-style apartment buildings. But the upset they were cheering was political, not athletic. On November 22nd Mauricio Macri, the mayor of the city of Buenos Aires, narrowly defeated Daniel Scioli, governor of Buenos Aires province, in a run-off to become Argentina’s next president.

The result is hugely significant, not just for Argentina but for South America. Mr Scioli ran as the heir of the country’s current president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, a charismatic but divisive populist. The election of Mr Macri, who campaigned under the banner of a coalition of parties called Cambiemos (“Let’s Change”), represents a repudiation of her legacy. He will be the first president in nearly a century who is neither a Peronist nor a member of the movement’s weaker rival, the Radical Civic Union.


For the past dozen years Ms Fernández and her husband (and predecessor as president), Néstor Kirchner, who died in 2010, have imposed controls on Argentina’s economy, which have crimped production and gradually pushed up inflation. They aligned the country with authoritarian regimes and tried to undermine independent institutions such as the media, the judiciary and the Central Bank. Mr Macri promises a return to economic, democratic and diplomatic norms.

His victory, by a margin of around three percentage points, looked unlikely until a month ago. Despite a sagging economy and allegations, which she denies, of self-enrichment while in power, Ms Fernández remains relatively popular. Mr Scioli thought her endorsement and the backing of the Peronist movement would bring him victory. By comparison, Mr Macri, a former president of the Boca Juniors football team and the son of a tycoon, looked like an outsider. He launched his centre-right party, Republican Proposal, just a decade ago. Until this year it had little presence outside the capital.

In the first round of voting in October Mr Macri came a surprisingly close second to Mr Scioli. That gave Mr Macri’s campaign a jolt of energy. In the second round he inherited much of the support that had gone to Sergio Massa, a dissident Peronist, in the first. He persuaded Argentines that his promise of change applies to the parts of kirchnerismo they don’t like, not to the ones they do, such as Ms Fernández’s generous welfare programmes and the nationalisation of YPF, an oil giant.

In some respects, Mr Macri will be able to set a new tone as soon as he is inaugurated on December 10th. His leadership style will be less confrontational than Ms Fernández’s. He will move quickly to shake up the statistics agency, which has been issuing misleading reports on inflation and poverty, and is expected to signal his commitment to judicial independence by naming unimpeachable candidates to fill two vacancies on the Supreme Court.


INTERACTIVE: 12 years of Argentina's election history
Fixing the economy, which has barely grown since October 2011, will be harder. The inflation rate has risen to around 25%, the peso is overvalued and the fiscal deficit is expected to be at least 6% of GDP this year. To put Argentina back on a path to growth, Mr Macri needs to dismantle the draconian currency and trade controls imposed by Ms Fernández in 2011 to prevent capital flight. The “clamp” on the purchase of foreign currency by individuals and businesses created an unofficial dual exchange-rate regime. That must now be unified by means of a devaluation. To keep the peso from falling too fast, Mr Macri must quickly find dollars, which are in short supply. “The Central Bank’s firepower is essentially zero,” says Luis Secco of Perspectiv@s, a consultancy. On November 21st the Central Bank told commercial banks to sell two-thirds of their dollar holdings to reinforce its own foreign-currency reserves.

The simplest way to raise dollars is to borrow on international markets, but for Mr Macri that will not be easy. To raise funds at reasonable rates, the government must reach an agreement with bondholders who had pushed Argentina into a default in July 2014. But such an agreement requires the consent of Congress, where Mr Macri’s party and its allies are in a minority. The new president’s success will depend greatly on whether he can attract the support of some Peronists in Congress. His narrow margin of victory could make that harder.

He will have an easier time reorienting Argentina’s foreign policy. Mr Macri wants to “rebalance” relations away from China, Venezuela, Russia and Iran and towards normal relations with the United States and Europe. He says he will call on Mercosur, a six-country South American trade grouping, to invoke its democracy clause to suspend Venezuela from membership unless the parliamentary election there on December 6th is conducted democratically and opposition political leaders are released from prison. No other Latin American president has been so outspoken. His victory leaves Venezuela looking much more isolated.

In turning to a politician of the centre-right to lead the country, Argentina may be setting a precedent for the rest of the region. The normal desire of voters in democracies for an alternation of power is now playing against the incumbent governments of the left. Brazil’s left-wing president, Dilma Rousseff, is deeply unpopular. The party that leads Venezuela’s radical socialist regime is likely to be defeated in next month’s election. Mr Macri’s victory may thus mark the ebbing of the “pink tide” that has washed over the region since the early 1990s.

South America is not about to go back to the past. The left put inequality on the region’s agenda and it is likely to remain there. But other issues are now equally pressing: clean government and a return to rapid economic growth. In Argentina the centre-right now has a chance to make these issues its own. Mr Macri’s victory may well be the shape of things to come. 

FALCONRY is less fashionable now than it was in days of yore. But, over the past few years, sharp-eyed ramblers in south Wales may have witnessed an updated version of this ancient pastime. Since 2012, in a project sponsored by the United States Air Force, Caroline Brighton and Graham Taylor of Oxford University have been flying peregrine falcons (see picture) and Harris’s hawks over the Black Mountains of Monmouthshire to study how these birds chase their prey. Ms Brighton hopes to gain a doctorate from the research. The USAF hopes the birds may be able to teach it a trick or two about intercepting targets, both in the air (the speciality of peregrines) and on the ground (the speciality of Harris’s hawks).

To carry out their research, Ms Brighton and Dr Taylor turned to the technology of wildlife documentaries. They attached miniature cameras and satellite trackers to harnesses worn by their birds. Then they put the birds through a series of tests. These included attacking a dead pheasant on the ground, chasing a dead chick that was dragged along the ground and through a series of tunnels by a winch and cable, and catching a dead chick dropped at altitude from a radio-controlled model aircraft. They fed the images they had recorded into a computer, which worked out the trajectory taken by the bird to intercept its prey.

Their first discovery was that, rather than hunting in the way previous research had suggested—namely, holding the prey at a constant angle while they moved in to intercept it—the birds followed a rule, known as proportional navigation, currently used by many missile-guidance systems. Unlike constant-angle tracking, this requires constant recalculation of speed and bearing, and is considered a hard trick.

What really intrigued the researchers’ air-force paymasters, though, was a peregrine’s responses if a live pheasant or duck turned up during a test. Then, the bird instantly lost interest in the lure and chased its new quarry using a tracking technique, dubbed optimal guidance, that is fitted only to the most advanced sorts of missiles. Optimal guidance employs optimal-control theory, a branch of maths also used in things like inventory control for manufacturing processes. That has led the air force’s experts to hope birds of prey may have other techniques to show off, perhaps including ones that human missile engineers have not yet thought of.   

FOR so long as there are wars to fight, the contest to have the best weaponry will continue. The attacks in Paris on November 13th, and their aftermath, will only reinforce this quest. Sniper technology is an area of particular interest to Western commanders. Where those faced by the armed might of the world’s great powers prefer the tactics of insurgency, military types particularly value the ability to hit a picked target at distance. And, unlike other forms of “precision” attack, such as drone strikes, sniping rarely kills nearby civilians.

Nor are sniper bullets merely anti-personnel weapons. At the moment, according to GlobalSecurity.org, a think-tank in Virginia, one of the best of them is the Raufoss MK211, made by Nammo, a Norwegian firm. This can penetrate 15mm of steel at a range of more than 500 metres, even when fired at an oblique angle of as little as 30° to the target. Moreover, once it has penetrated, a fuse sets off both an explosive charge (to spray shrapnel) and an incendiary one (to ignite any leaking fuel). According to Vegard Sande, one of Nammo’s engineers, a single MK211 shot can destroy a helicopter.

For all its sophistication, though, the MK211 is still a dumb round. Once it has left the gun’s muzzle, its destiny is determined. In many ways, it is yesterday’s weapon. In ballistics, as in so many other fields of technology, the fashion is now for introducing “smartness.”

Snipers like to create an aura of lone-wolf mystique around themselves—an image reinforced by their portrayals in books and films. In fact, a sniper almost always relies on a spotter to feed him information about a target’s location. He may also need assistance in dealing with the long list of things that could cause him to miss—from crosswinds to the rotation of the Earth. Coping with them can require complex mathematical calculations. One way to simplify matters would be to make bullets that know where they are going and can change course in mid-flight to get there. And one such has been designed at Sandia National Laboratories, an American government establishment in New Mexico.

No hiding place
In one sense, this new bullet takes a step backwards. Rifled barrels—which have helical grooves that impart flight-stabilising spin to a bullet—turned muskets from things useful only when fired en masse into instruments of assassination, and thus ushered in the profession of sniper. In a reversion to 18th-century practice the new bullet, which has not yet been given a name, is fired from a smoothbore barrel. But its resemblance to a musket ball ends there. Rather, it is a pointed projectile with fins, actuators that can change the trim of those fins, an on-board computer to control the actuators, an optical sensor in its tip that tells the computer where the target is, and a lithium battery to power the lot. To protect the fins it is cradled for firing in structures called sabots. These fall off once the bullet has left the barrel.

The sensor knows where to steer the bullet because the sniper’s spotter is shining an infrared laser at the target. Infrared is invisible, so the target cannot see this, but the laser’s reflection lets the computer adjust the bullet’s trim 30 times a second, so even a moving target cannot escape.

Designing such a device is not, in fact, that hard—except for one thing. All the kit within it has to survive an acceleration 120,000 times that of the Earth’s gravitational pull when the gun is fired. But Sandia’s engineers have managed to make that happen, and licences to manufacture the device are now available.

A second dodging-and-weaving bullet, EXACTO, is also under development in America. Its design is being overseen by DARPA, the Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency, an arm of the defence department. Unlike the Sandia bullet, EXACTO is spin-stabilised and can thus be fired from a standard 12.7mm rifle.

How such a finless projectile is steered is one of DARPA’s secrets. Another is how it is told where to go. Unlike the Sandia bullet, EXACTO relies on a signal coming from its controllers rather than a reflection from the target. Spin-generated air turbulence would be expected to interfere with this. In the case of EXACTO, though, it doesn’t. DARPA’s engineers have also, according to Steve Sampson of Cubic Global Defense, a contractor working on EXACTO, managed to harden the electronics involved to withstand the centrifugal force imparted by the spin, as well as the force of the initial acceleration. No announcement has been made about when this bullet will be deployed. Indeed, no announcement may ever be made. It may just happen, to the discomfort of America’s enemies.

A third type of smart round, which is guided in another way again from the Sandia bullet and EXACTO, is the XM25, developed by Alliant Techsystems, a weapons company that is now part of OrbitalATK. This is designed for times when a sniper does not have a clear line of sight to his target—if the man is dug in, for example. It is spin-stabilised, and its internal computer counts the number of revolutions it has made. That tells it how far it has travelled. When it is directly over the target it explodes, scattering shrapnel. It has already been combat-tested in Afghanistan and, though there have been problems with it (an American soldier was slightly injured by one misfiring in his gun during training), the idea is that it will be deployed in earnest in 2017.

Guided bullets of this sort promise to transform sniping. Increased accuracy means a marksman can be farther from his target when he fires. He need not even have a clear line of sight, so long as his spotter does. And guided bullets will also make snipers’ own lives safer. One of the biggest threats they face is the use by potential targets of arrays of microphones that feed the sound of incoming bullets to a computer which triangulates the sniper’s position. Such detectors can aim a machine gun at the apparent source of incoming rounds. But this works only if the apparent source is the real source. Guided bullets can arrive from an angle that deceives the equipment into wasting its fire on empty landscape.

Nor is making bullets smart the only way to increase accuracy. Making guns smart works too. This is the approach taken by TrackingPoint, a Texan firm. Its system collects and crunches almost all the variables (distance to target; air temperature and pressure; compass bearing, to allow for the Earth’s spin; and even the size of the area on the target that will produce a kill) which might cause a dumb round to miss. The sniper has only to add wind speed and direction, and then pull the trigger. The gun waits until its calculations suggest all is well before firing the bullet. According to John McHale, TrackingPoint’s boss, a marksman can “close his eyes at this point and just wiggle his gun” until it fires. If that is even approximately true, it raises an interesting question: is the job of sniper, which was created by technological advance, about to be abolished by it?

That question may be answered soon. Unlike the Sandia bullet and EXACTO, TrackingPoint’s system is now available—and more than 45 of the world’s defence ministries would, indeed, like to avail themselves of it. At the moment, unless their address is in Arlington, Virginia, they cannot; the American government has forbidden the system’s export. This, though, has not stopped people trying. TrackingPoint has suffered so many cyber attacks that details are now kept strictly offline. Yet sooner or later, the secret will out. When it does, the mystique of the sniper may simply evaporate, as every infantry grunt in an army that can afford it becomes a sharpshooter in his own right.

BOTH climate change and climate policies have a major impact on world income distribution. If nothing is done to address climate change, less developed and vulnerable countries will suffer disproportionately: climate shocks destroy part of their capital stock, making successful economic development even more difficult than it was in the past. Conversely, the adoption of stringent climate policies will mean that carbon-intensive countries will have to carry a substantial policy burden. Yet, the concerns of high climate-policy costs are not fully warranted, as I show in the book “Greening Economy, Graying Society”. Positive growth effects of climate policies are mostly underrated relative to short-run costs, since decision makers tend to focus on the near term. Uncertainty about future development often guides politics towards inaction which is the wrong direction in this context; given risk aversion, a reduction in uncertainty would be desirable, and would reduce estimated net costs of climate mitigation. But even when total costs of climate mitigation are moderate, the costs at the country level remain highly critical, because no country wants to be pushed in an unfavourable situation compared to its competitors. The Kyoto protocol failed because it prescribed uneven burden sharing; it neglected to include all major emitters in any meaningful way.


Under the UN Climate Convention the concept of “Common but Differentiated Responsibilities” has become the central guideline for burden sharing. But how can it be made operational? Given the complexity of negotiations, the best way forward is to use “focal points”, principles that are part of everybody’s general expectations, suitable to build acceptance and trust among the negotiating partners. The best known principle is the “ability to pay”: the larger the economic capacity of a country, the more it should contribute to global policy. The second principle concerns “policy cost sharing”: the lower a country’s costs of the policy, the more it should contribute. A third issue is the “merit principle”: the bigger the efforts of a country to solve the underlying problem, the more it should be rewarded. The last principle requires “comparing like with like”, which for the climate problem means that emissions at times of abundant alternative energy sources are weighted differently from emissions at times of few alternative energy sources.

An ideal metric for international burden sharing in climate policy should be comprehensive, measurable, replicable, and universal. The four basic equity principles can be combined to generate such such a metric, which in turn can be used to allocate the world's carbon budget to the different countries in a way which is compatible with the global temperature target. This can be done online with the ETH Climate Calculator. Within this tool one can choose different weights for the four equity principles and compare the allocated carbon budget with the current mitigation pledges of different countries. What's more, the tool allows a comparison between equity-based burden-sharing and other policy proposals: a uniform global carbon tax with domestic use of tax revenues, and an equal carbon budget per capita, independent of other indicators. Comparing the policies one can see that the equity-based allocation is a compromise between the other more extreme policies—one which might clear the way to an agreement.

To date, over 160 parties to the UN's climate-change convention have formally submitted their planned climate-policy targets (called INDCs). Now that these pledges are available it is natural to ask: How do the countries’ pledges compare among each other? How can the ambitions of the world community be raised? This is where the ETH climate calculator aims to make a contribution: it allows the INDC pledges to be evaluated in a more transparent and directly comparable way. The official climate-negotiation process currently does not rely on such a comparative approach. It rather stresses that the ambitions of each country should be raised relative to past pledges and repeatedly refers to “national circumstances”. However, to reach a truly fair burden sharing for climate policy, the INDCs should be systematically reviewed and compared, focusing on the global circumstances.

FOR ordinary Chinese investors, painful memories of the summer’s stockmarket meltdown are fading away, soothed by a fresh rally in share prices. But for the government, the fallout is just getting started. In recent weeks it has launched investigations into officials, bankers and hedge-fund managers suspected of illegal trading. It has tightened rules about using debt to buy shares. Now it is planning the biggest overhaul of Chinese financial regulation in more than a decade.

The idea is to create a “super-regulator”, combining three separate agencies and, possibly, the central bank into a single, powerful entity responsible for monitoring all financial firms: banks, insurers, brokerages, asset managers and so on. Consolidation has been mooted before, only for the system to remain unchanged. But according to people familiar with government discussions, big changes are virtually certain this time because of the stockmarket debacle.

China assembled its regulatory framework in piecemeal fashion in the 1990s and early 2000s as the financial system took shape. Different agencies look after banks, brokerages and insurers, whereas the central bank oversees the financial system as a whole. This elaborate division of labour has made for disjointed supervision.

Although the central bank is often described as preeminent, all four agencies have the status of ministries and report to the State Council, or cabinet. But the State Council has lots on its plate. “Things almost need to reach a crisis level for it to notice,” says a banker in Beijing.

The stockmarket crash that began in mid-June was a stark illustration. In the months leading up to it, analysts grew alarmed at the rise in margin financing as investors borrowed cash to buy shares. Looking at brokerage data alone, the securities regulator was confident that risks were under control. But at the same time, peer-to-peer lenders, which are supervised by the banking regulator, created products that allowed investors to pile on more debt.

It was not the first time that regulatory divisions had obscured growing risks in China. Shadow banking exploded over the past five years as banks dealt variously with insurance companies, asset-managers and securities firms to exploit loopholes. Debt limits on local governments have also been skirted easily by provinces and cities using corporate-like entities to borrow from banks.

Officials have yet to spell out how they will reform financial regulation and it could be at least another year before they do so, but the general direction is clear. The Communist Party’s new five-year plan, for 2016-20, calls for greater regulatory co-ordination. Earlier this month Xi Jinping, China’s president, said the financial system had become too complex for such divided oversight. He noted that many countries had created more unified regulatory frameworks after the global financial crisis, and that China could learn from them.

In discussions in Beijing the British model has been held up as one to study. Britain abolished the Financial Services Authority, its banking regulator, judging that it had failed to keep proper tabs on banks before the 2008 blow-up. Its role of ensuring financial stability was handed to the Bank of England.

The fact that big banks and other financial institutions are state-owned presents unique challenges for Chinese regulators. If the agency supervising banking were to report to the central bank, it might have to be demoted to vice-ministerial rank to connote its junior status within the super-regulator. Awkwardly, that would put it on par with the biggest banks, whose bosses are also vice-ministers. One option is to lower the standing of bank chiefs, a proposal that is sure to meet opposition.

Moreover, the main problem in the Chinese financial system remains an excess of government meddling, not private misconduct. Straightening out the lines of communication to ensure better monitoring of risks makes sense. But when government-guaranteed debts that government-owned companies owe to government-controlled banks are the biggest financial risk, the government’s handling of it all will always be viewed with suspicion.

THE ingredients of “Futurity”, a new off-Broadway show, promise a noble failure. Like clowns in a snug car, the story crams together the bloodiness of America’s civil war, the barbarity of slavery, the purity of mathematics, the promise of artificial intelligence and the wisdom of Ada Lovelace (an early computer scientist and metaphysicist). Oh, and it is a musical, with tunes that range from folksy to barnstorming, and lyrics that revel in wonkiness (“What’s the animating force from which intelligence emerges/Is it material in nature or a spiritual convergence?”). Add all of this together and you should get a mess. Instead, “Futurity” is an absolute delight.

The show’s arrival at New York’s downtown Connolly Theatre, where it will play through November 22nd, was years in the making. “I don’t really like musicals, so I thought maybe I could write one I like,” explains César Alvarez, the show’s lanky young star, who also wrote its book, music and lyrics. He was always drawn to the way music can help tell a story, how it “speaks directly to the emotional part of our brain. It literally shakes the viscera.” But he never much cared for the formulaic fare typical of Broadway, where risk-averse producers commission soundtracks that ooze with cynical sincerity. So he began “Futurity” as a concept album for his band, The Lisps, which they first performed on a shoestring budget at a now-defunct downtown space in 2009.

Sarah Benson, the artistic director of the Soho Rep, saw an early concert of and knew it belonged in a theatre. She had never directed a musical before—she shares Mr Alvarez’s antipathy for the usual razzamatazz—but she had always been intrigued by music’s power to “elevate experience into something that transcends what’s rational,” she says. She also saw in the songs a story that was naturally theatrical: “It’s about how we overcome our fallibilities to imagine things beyond ourselves.”

The show tells the story of a fictional civil-war soldier named Julian (Mr Alvarez), who dreams of a fate other than imminent death. An aspiring inventor, he writes to Ada Lovelace (Sunny Tunis of The Lisps) in the hopes that she will help him create a “thinking machine” capable of transcending, and therefore resolving, thorny human illogic. Could a “steam brain” figure out a way to end the war? Julian and Ada ponder the potential (“Is morality made of information?”; “Is an impractical question worth pursuing?”) as Julian’s battalion marches (and sings) towards the front.

From the start it is clear that “Futurity” is a rather different sort of musical. It opens with Mr Alvarez and his band (an appealingly incongruous foursome) in T-shirts and jeans,  addressing the audience directly. “Do not attempt to learn about history from this musical,” he quips before retreating backstage. When the curtain rises moments later, Mr Alvarez is in uniform with his battalion, each soldier armed with a musical instrument (everything is performed on stage by an impressive ensemble of actor-musicians). The music itself is stirring, mixing rustic Appalachian sounds with a cool and often irreverent contemporary sensibility. Occasionally Mr Alvarez and Ms Tunis break character to banter as themselves (“They didn’t clap for either of us,” she says after their opening numbers), and the effect is unexpectedly endearing. By calling attention to the artifice of performance, they subtly highlight their role as the show’s creators, too. (This quality similarly enriches Lin-Manuel Miranda’s star turn in his own musical “Hamilton”, now playing to sold-out crowds on Broadway.)

“Futurity” does not shy away from weighty themes or dark concepts. Death and human frailty run throughout the show, alongside cosmic questions about the nature of intelligence and the value of fruitless pursuits. Yet the overall effect is uplifting. In part this is because Mr Alvarez—who now teaches musical theatre at the University of the Arts in Philadelphia—has injected this show with both humour and hope. But also he suggests there is something about the musical form that is almost invariably heartening. “Music is about organising chaos,” he says. When so many people, so many instruments, come together to create something harmonious, the effect is unfailingly stirring. “It’s primal,” he observes. “You can’t help but think, ‘Look at how well we can work together.’”

IT WOULD be difficult to name another historical moment so dominated by teenage virgins,” observes Stacy Schiff, in a masterly new account of the Salem witch trails. In 1692 writhing girls in the Massachusetts village of Salem, steeped in Puritan teachings about the devil and perhaps also bored, began hurling charges of witchcraft at village women. Accusations spread swiftly. By the time the crisis ended less than a year later, 14 women and five men had been hanged, and another was crushed to death by stones.

The tale is alternately absurd and heart-rending. Suspects were subject to bodily searches. Witches’ teats could lurk in marks like warts or insect bites, perhaps a conduit for the devil to enter the body. Several of the accused were found to have “a preternatural excrescence of flesh between the pudendum and anus”. The unfortunates were kept chained in cold and dank prisons, where some died. Even a five-year-old was held for several months.   

Many asserted their innocence, to no avail. “You tax me for a wizard. You may as well tax me for a buzzard,” said George Jacobs, who insisted that he was no witch. Perversely, pleading innocent tended to bring a death sentence, whereas those who confessed were spared. Some who pleaded guilty to survive felt awful remorse for lying.

Ms Schiff, a Pulitzer prize-winning author and biographer of Cleopatra, clearly relishes her subject and its historical context. She adopts a wry, confident and sometimes even playful tone. Witches race around on brooms; they appear as wolves or yellow birds; the devil presides at a witches’ convention. All the while, many accusers remained, in the words of one rare sceptic, Thomas Brattle, curiously “hale and hearty, robust and lusty”.

At least 144 people faced accusations, and the thicket of charges sometimes can make it hard to keep track of who’s who. (A cast of characters in the front of the book helps.) Women, with their weaker wills, “were understood to be more susceptible to witchcraft”, Ms Schiff writes. Her challenge is that records are limited, so she builds drama where she can find it. Curiously, no court records of the trials themselves have survived, though transcripts of some preliminary hearings, as well as related documents like indictments and confessions, remain. Some diaries of high officials at the time are surprisingly empty.

“What sets Salem apart”, Ms Schiff writes, “is not the accusations but the convictions.” She assigns particular blame to William Stoughton (pictured, in a portrait in the Harvard Art Museums), the chief justice at the trials, whose name still adorns a Harvard dormitory. As Ms Schiff points out, he was a bachelor with no knowledge of teenage girls; hence his willingness to allow “spectral evidence” seen by hysterical girls and other accusers, but no one else.

The trials ended suddenly, as the community and justices wrestled with whether innocents had gone to their deaths. After all, what was innocence and what was guilt? Could the devil co-opt a person’s form and appear as a witch, even while that person remained innocent? Europe had already ceased to prosecute witches, and prior to Salem, New England had known just four confessed witches. That Massachusetts allowed the trials to get so badly out of hand remains one of history’s tragic enigmas.

THE hangover from the debt crisis of 2007-08 can still be felt. Developed economies are growing sluggishly and central banks are maintaining a policy of near-zero interest rates. Debt is still a huge burden on the Western economies, and politicians are arguing about how to deal with it.

Adair Turner was one of the regulators who had to deal with the fallout from the crisis. A classic technocrat, with spells in management consulting and investment banking and as head of the Confederation of British Industry, a lobby group, he took charge of the Financial Services Authority, Britain’s regulator, on September 20th 2008. Only days before, Lehman Brothers had collapsed. He has now reflected on the causes of a crisis that he freely admits he did not see approaching. The problem, he argues, lies in the nature of credit creation.

Most new credit is created by the commercial banking system. In simple economic models, banks take deposits from consumers and lend them out to businesses. In fact, however, most lending goes to the property sector. In 1928, property lending comprised 30% of all bank loans across 17 advanced economies; by 2007, this proportion was approaching 60%.

So when central banks cut rates to stimulate the economy, the newly created credit may well be used not to buy new assets, but to buy existing properties. The result can be a speculative bubble. When it bursts the economy can be damaged, as asset prices fall, leading to a rise in bad debts; a debt-deflation cycle. A further problem is that rising asset prices deliver big gains to the wealthy, who have a lower propensity to spend than the worse-off. The result is sluggish growth in demand unless the middle-classes and the poor borrow to maintain their standard of living. But that creates the fuel for the next crisis.

Before 2007 regulators and economists were slow to recognise this issue. They regarded debt as a zero-sum game (for every debtor, there is a creditor) and the rapid rise of the financial sector as a largely benign phenomenon. Since the crisis, regulators have tried to stabilise the system, chiefly by requiring banks to hold more capital. But Lord Turner, a life peer in the British Parliament, thinks a complete rethink is needed.

“Free financial markets left to themselves are bound to create credit in excessive quantities and allocate it inefficiently, generating unstable booms and busts,” he writes in his new book, “Between Debt and the Devil”. Instead, countries should restrict private credit growth and consider allowing the central bank to create money to finance a budget deficit. Such an idea smacks of the Weimar Republic, where the policy led to hyperinflation. But Lord Turner argues that it should be possible to prevent excessive money creation. Furthermore, this option would be better than the alternatives: stagnation caused by the failure of the private sector to create credit, or the boom-and-bust cycles of the past.

This idea, which is not entirely new, is what lies behind the tentative plans for “people’s quantitative easing” advanced by the new left-wing leadership of the Labour Party. This might seem odd company for a former McKinsey consultant. But if developed economies fall back into recession, people may hear quite a bit more about Lord Turner’s ideas.

FOR Europe, as Ian Kershaw notes in this magisterial history, which came out in Britain in September and is just being published in America, the 20th century was a game of two halves. The first saw a cataclysm that brought down empires, plunged the continent into a deep slump and culminated in the horrors of the second world war. At least for Western Europe, the second was, in contrast, a triumph of peace and prosperity. That distinction may explain why Mr Kershaw has sensibly divided his original assignment to write the 20th-century volume in the Penguin “History of Europe” series into two books, of which this is the first.


His broad picture of what went wrong in Europe in the 20th century is built around four related points. First was the rise of ethnic nationalism, something that helped to doom the multinational empires of Austria-Hungary, Russia and the Ottomans. Next were demands for territorial revision, between France and Germany, in central and eastern Europe and all over the Balkans. Third was class conflict, as workers and a nascent socialist movement flexed their muscles against bosses and the traditional aristocratic ruling class. And fourth was the crisis of capitalism, which struck home in the early 1930s and contributed hugely to the rise of Nazism.


Mr Kershaw, an acknowledged expert on Germany and author of the best biography of Adolf Hitler, naturally places the two world wars at the heart of his narrative, with Germany standing condemned as the main cause of both. That is a more controversial position to take for the first than the second, but on the whole Mr Kershaw justifies his claim. He also delineates cogently and chillingly the way in which the collapse of the tsarist empire, brought about to a large extent by Russia’s military and political setbacks during the first world war, led to the Bolshevik triumph and the creation of the Soviet Union, which in almost all respects was worse than what went before.

The author shows how the failings of that first war’s victors—the reparations fiasco, the Versailles treaty, America’s withdrawal into isolationism—laid the ground for a path that led inexorably to the second. But he also insists that the path was not inevitable. The Locarno treaty of 1925 between Germany, France, Britain, Belgium and Italy, and the entry of Weimar Germany into the League of Nations, could, just about, have led to something rather like the rehabilitation of West Germany in the 1950s. What really took Europe back to the horrors that culminated in another war was economic collapse after 1929. Just as after the recent financial crisis of 2007-08, it was the political right, not the left, that benefited most from this collapse. In Europe that ultimately meant a snuffing out of democracy and the rise of the extreme right in Spain, much of central Europe and, above all, in Germany.

Mr Kershaw’s focus on Germany inevitably means a few weaknesses elsewhere. His strictures against the other great European tyrant of the period, Josef Stalin, are softer than those against Hitler. Indeed, he somewhat underplays the horrific history of the Soviet Union from the late 1920s up to the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939. He has little to say on Turkey: no mention of Field-Marshal Allenby nor T.E. Lawrence, little on Kemal Ataturk. His treatment of the military story of the two world wars is succinct almost to the point of cursoriness, but this ground is well-tilled in other books. It is also obvious from his narrative that he is more interested in politics and war than in social, demographic and cultural changes, though he dutifully covers these too.

As in previous volumes in the series, the editors have decided to dispense with footnotes and sources (though there is a useful bibliography). That may be understandable in a history aimed more at the general public than at fellow academics, but it is still annoying. Yet this is a worthy, impressive and well-written addition to a series that has become the definitive history of Europe for our times—and one that whets the appetite for his next volume.

WHILE the euro zone limps along, growing in the third quarter by a disappointing 0.3% (an annualised rate of 1.2%), one small member of the 19-strong currency club is racing ahead. Less than two years since Ireland exited its humiliating bail-out, its economy is resurgent. Following growth of 5.2% in 2014, GDP rose by 7.0% in the first half of 2015 compared with the same period a year earlier.

Welcome as it may be, the vigour of the upswing highlights the troublesome volatility of the small and ultra-open Irish economy. It is bouncing back, after all, from a deep slump that followed an earlier spell of vaulting growth. The notion that the Irish economy might rebound so strongly would have been dismissed as fantasy only a couple of years ago. Irish banks went spectacularly bust during the financial crisis and required a bail-out of €64 billion ($89 billion), close to two-fifths of GDP. Their woes meant that the Irish state had itself to be bailed out by the EU and the IMF in late 2010. Between its pre-crisis peak in late 2007 and its nadir at the end of 2009, the economy contracted by 11.2% (see chart). A recovery in the following two years petered out and the economy lost ground in 2012 and the first half of 2013.


The severity of the crisis, which was linked to a collapse of the housing market, was such that despite the recent rapid growth, GDP per person remains below its peak in 2007 (although GDP surpassed the pre-crisis high a year ago). The scars of the recession and the banking bail-out on the public finances remain livid. Although public debt should fall below 100% of GDP this year (after peaking at 120% in 2012 and 2013), that is still far higher than in 2007, when it was a mere 24%.

Even in the depths of the slump the Irish economy nonetheless retained some formidable strengths. It continues to appeal to American multinationals as a European production base, thanks to a well-educated labour force and a low corporate-tax rate of just 12.5%. Ireland is favoured by pharmaceutical giants such as Pfizer and has also become a magnet for tech and social-media firms. Apple continues to build up its activities in Cork; Dublin hosts the likes of Facebook and Google.

The multinationals’ presence in Ireland helped when the rest of the economy was in the doldrums, as net trade—exports less imports—partially, and at times completely, offset the domestic downturn. The scale of their activities is such that Ireland’s overall exports were worth 114% of GDP last year; imports were also very high, at 95%. Ireland has benefited from the fact that it exports heavily to America and Britain, both of which have outperformed the torpid euro area.

More recently Irish exports have been boosted by a weak euro, which for much of 2015 has traded between 15% and 20% lower against the dollar than a year earlier. That is because the European Central Bank has been loosening monetary policy even as the Federal Reserve prepares to tighten it—a divergence that looks likely to continue in the coming months. Ireland is even relatively insulated from the slowdown in emerging markets, since they account for just a tenth of its exports—the lowest level, along with Luxembourg, in the euro area. (In the four biggest euro-zone economies, they make up around 30% of exports.)

From 2010 until mid-2013 the Irish economy made only modest progress despite the boost from net exports, as consumers and firms were reluctant to spend. What has changed in the past two years is that domestic demand is now helping, too. Although building investment remains subdued, overall capital spending is growing strongly as businesses in particular spend more on new equipment. Consumer spending has finally started to revive too, growing by 2% in 2014 and by 3.3% in the first half of 2015 compared with the same period in 2014. As in the rest of the euro area, households have been able to spend more because lower energy prices have had much the same effect as a tax cut.

Despite the rebound in growth, this is not an action replay of the disastrous overheating of a decade ago. House prices have been rising sharply, especially in Dublin, but having fallen by half during the crisis they remain a third lower than their peak in 2007. There is not even a glimmer of a construction boom despite the acute shortage of property in hotspots such as Dublin: 11,000 houses were completed in Ireland last year, compared with around 90,000 in 2006. Credit is still falling rather than ballooning, as occurred in the previous boom. This is hardly surprising since the banks that have survived are still nursing wounds incurred last time.

Moreover, although the economy has been picking up speed it has still not reached full capacity. Unemployment has dropped a long way, from a peak of 15.2% at the start of 2012 to 8.9% in October, but there is still scope for further decline. Economists reckon it could fall to 6% without stoking inflation. The decline in debt suggests that households, too, have the capacity to spend a bit more.

Perhaps the biggest cause for concern is whether Irish politicians have really kicked the bad habits of the past. The coalition government headed by Enda Kenny, which was formed just three months after the bail-out, complied unflinchingly with its harsh terms. But Ireland exited the bail-out nearly two years ago. With an election due in early 2016, the government recently announced an early Christmas present of €1.5 billion of extra spending this year, or 0.7% of GDP. Corporate-tax receipts have been much higher than expected, making the splurge affordable. But the gain in revenue may be temporary, whereas the higher spending will persist. That is an unfortunate echo of Ireland’s chequered fiscal past.

“KEEP your eyes on the stars,” said Teddy Roosevelt, “and your feet on the ground.” America’s can-do spirit keeps its economy moving forward, but over-optimism can be harmful, especially if it leads people to make promises they cannot meet. If investment returns are lower in coming decades than they have been in recent ones, that is the position pension funds and college endowments will be in.

When final-salary pension schemes, which are still prevalent among America’s public-sector employees, decide how much to put aside to pay pensions, they have to make an assumption about what returns they will earn. The higher their estimate, the less employers have to contribute today. Similarly, endowments have to estimate their future returns to determine how much to spend each year: pay out too much and their funds will dwindle away.

The average American state or local-government pension fund assumes it will earn a nominal (ie, not accounting for inflation) annual return of 7.69% in future, according to the National Association of State Retirement Administrators (NASRA). Based on past performance, that seems reasonable. Over the past five years the median pension fund has earned an annualised return of 9.5%; over the past 25 years, the return has been 8.5%. College endowments use very similar assumptions: they target a return of 7.4%, on average, according to a survey from the National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO) and Commonfund, an asset manager. Again, this jibes with the average annual return in 2005-14, of 7.1%.

But as the saying goes, past performance is no guide to future returns. Investment returns come from two sources: income and capital gains. The income portion is much lower than it used to be. The yield on long-dated Treasury bonds 25 years ago was more than 8%; an investor who held such bonds to maturity could lock in that nominal return. Now the yield on the ten-year Treasury bond is just 2.3%. Yields on corporate bonds, which pay a spread over government debt, have fallen in tandem. For equities, the dividend yield on the S&P 500 index in 1990 was 3.7%; now it is just 2.1%. (In theory share buy-backs make up for some of the fall in dividends, but they are offset by the issuance of new equity for executive bonuses.)

Yields move in the opposite direction to prices. They are low because the price of equities and bonds has risen dramatically in recent years. This has delivered capital gains to investors, boosting total returns.

Future gains depend either on even higher valuations, or on increases in profits and dividends. Profits usually grow in line with the economy. They can rise faster when the economy is recovering from recession, but the American economy has been growing for years, and profits are close to a post-war high as a share of GDP.

So a pension fund or endowment that assumes investment returns will continue at their recent pace is engaging in doublethink. For that to happen, either profits will have to take an unprecedentedly high share of GDP or yields will have to fall to an unprecedentedly low level. In other words, for future returns to match the past, future economic conditions would have to look completely different.

Elroy Dimson, a professor at both the Cambridge and London Business Schools, is the co-author of a study of investment returns, covering 23 countries and more than a century of data. He thinks the likely future long-term real return on a balanced portfolio of equities and bonds will be 2-2.5%. AQR, a fund-management group, has come up with a remarkably similar figure, 2.4%, by assuming annual growth in dividends and profits of 1.5% for a portfolio priced at current valuations and split 60-40 between equities and bonds. It applied the same formula to valuations over the past century, and found that the current projected return is lower than at any time in the past (see chart). Assuming an inflation rate of 2%, such a real return equates to a nominal one of 4-4.5%, far short of the estimates used by pension funds and endowments.


Decent investment returns are vital if pensions are to be paid in full. According to NASRA, the total revenues—the money needed to pay benefits—of American public-sector pension funds have been $5.9 trillion since 1984. Of this, employers have contributed $1.5 trillion and employees $730 billion. The vast bulk—$3.7 trillion—came from investment returns.

Yet states and local governments are not putting away enough to pay pensions, even assuming their optimistic assumptions about returns are met. The last year funds made the full contribution required by their plans was 2001. They have fallen short by 10% or more in every year since 2008. As a result, the Centre for Retirement Research (CRR) estimates that the average state and local pension plan was 74% funded at the end of last year—down from fully funded in 2001. That equates to a deficit of $1 trillion or so. As the hole gets bigger, higher future contributions are needed. They have risen from 6.7% of payroll in 2001 to 18.6% now.

The realistic solutions to this mess are bigger contributions from employers (higher taxes, in other words), higher contributions from employees (pay cuts) or reduced benefits. But many pension funds seem to hope they can make up the shortfall in returns by investing in alternative assets (property, private equity and hedge funds). A survey by Towers Watson, an actuary, showed that alternative assets as a proportion of American pension portfolios (public and private) rose from 16% in 2004 to 29% in 2014.  

Such diversification has not been wholly successful. So far this year a global hedge-fund index produced by HFR, a data provider, is down by 2.6%. The index also fell by 0.6% in 2014. Long-term returns on American property are very similar to those from equities. Future returns from this asset class are also likely to have fallen: the yield on property funds (REITs, in the jargon) was more than 8% in 2000, but is now below 4%. Long-term returns from private equity have been better (14% annualised over the past decade, according to Bain, a consultancy), but the industry is not large enough to absorb huge amounts of pension money. Buy-outs totalled $252 billion in 2014; American public-sector pension funds have assets of $3.2 trillion. Investing in alternative assets may be a sensible way of reducing risk, but it is unlikely to boost overall returns by much.

College endowments have to make similar calculations to pension funds. If they want to maintain their assets over the long term, they have to be prudent in their investment assumptions. The rule of thumb, according to William Jarvis at Commonfund, is to take the assumed investment return of 7-7.5% and deduct a percentage point for expenses and two points for inflation. That translates into a spending rate of 4-5% a year. The average college spent 4.4% of its endowment on operating expenses in 2014.

If investment returns fall to 4-4.5%, and the same rule of thumb applies, spending could drop to 1-1.5% of assets, a two-thirds decrease. Fortunately, universities are much less dependent on investment returns than public pension funds: they also get money from tuition fees and gifts from donors. Big colleges (those with assets of over $1 billion) are the most exposed: they rely on their endowments for 16.9% of their budget, compared with 4.2% for colleges that have less than $25m in assets. But in both cases, the squeeze will not be as great as the one that pension funds face.

Other long-term investors could also be at risk. German insurers offer savings products with an average guaranteed return of 3.2%, well above the current level of government-bond yields. Japanese insurers were devastated by a similar problem in the 1990s; some had to close.

The good news is that this is a long-term problem. Low returns are like a car with a fuel leak; it can still be driven for a while before it grinds to a halt. The bad news is that, precisely because this is a long-term problem, investors (particularly the politicians responsible for public pension funds) will be tempted to leave it to their successors. That will only make the eventual funding crisis even bigger.

FIVE years ago the odds of being able to pay with a credit card at a street stall or coffee stand in America were next to zero. Nowadays, though, cash seems slightly déclassé at hipster cafes and fancy farmers’ markets. That is thanks largely to Square, a six-year-old firm which handles credit-card payments for 2m-odd small merchants and listed in New York this week.

A private fundraising last year valued Square at roughly $6 billion. The initial public offering (IPO) priced it at $2.9 billion, down by half. The valuation sent a frisson through Silicon Valley, where there are increasing concerns that the optimistic assumptions about the growth and profitability of many “unicorns”—privately held technology firms valued at over $1 billion—are unfounded. Square, the theory runs, may be the first of a series of “down rounds”, capital-raisings that sharply reduce valuations.

Nonetheless, the IPO still leaves Square more valuable than all but the biggest of America’s banks. That is controversial, since the firm has lost $420m since 2012 and has said it intends to lose more. Sceptics dismiss it as a money pit; believers, such as Rick Oglesby of Double Diamond Group, a consultancy, see the losses as investments in growth. He notes that although losses have increased by 80% since 2012, they have shrunk from 44% of revenues to just 16% in the most recent half-year. Project those sorts of trends forward and the future looks bright.

To gratify the optimists, Square will have to prove that it can eventually make money by helping tiny businesses accept credit-card payments. Its chief executive, Jack Dorsey, who also runs Twitter, says he resolved to create Square when he realised that “my second boss (after my mother!) couldn’t accept a credit card for his art.” The banks and companies that link firms to card networks (merchant acquirers, in the payments jargon) had long ignored any vendor likely to generate less than $50,000 a year in transactions, since the expense of recruiting them tended to outweigh the income they generated. The small firms, for their part, tended to find the paperwork, costs and equipment needed to accept card payments offputting.

Square, in contrast, offers appealingly simple technology—a small “dongle” that allows anyone with a tablet computer or smartphone to swipe a card (the way most card payments are still taken in America). It is easy to sign up for and charges the merchant a flat price, typically 2.75% of each transaction, which is unusually straightforward, although not especially cheap.

There are millions more “micro-merchants” to recruit—one of the reasons for optimism about Square’s prospects. But it takes a long time to recoup the marketing costs involved, given such firms’ low turnover and high chance of going out of business, points out Karim Ahmad of Bain and Company, another consultancy.

Square seems to have concluded much the same, in that it has been expanding its offerings. It provides a service to slightly bigger firms called “Square register”, which helps them keep accounts and manage inventory as well as take payments. It also recently began offering loans to its customers, which it is well placed to do given its knowledge of their finances. By the same token it has set up a division to offer help with marketing, something for which its vast database of transactions might prove useful.

Most of the profits in the card business flow to the banks that issue them, the merchant acquirers and the payment networks such as Mastercard and Visa. Square and other tech firms that are active in this area rely on the existing card network. The extra transactions they bring into the system provide additional profits for the industry’s giants. But the innovators’ knack for design and data-crunching still rattles the incumbents, which worry about losing their connection with customers and seeing their end of the business commoditised. Square’s lacklustre IPO suggests that many investors doubt it is the firm to reshape the payments industry. But there are lots of other would-be disruptors waiting in the wings.

FOR a Dutchman driving his caravan to the Costa del Sol, the only thing to remind him that he had crossed borders used to be the successive text messages welcoming him to Belgium, France and Spain. That was before this summer’s migrant crisis—and last weekend’s terrorist attacks in Paris. Now the liberty to roam the 26 countries in the border-free Schengen zone, which Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, calls a “unique symbol of European integration”, is under greater threat than at any point since its inception.

Calls to curb borderless travel were already growing louder in August after Ayoub El Khazzani, a Moroccan national, carried an assault rifle across two borders on a Thalys train before attacking fellow passengers. In September Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, warned that without agreement on how to handle refugees they would grow louder still. The overwhelming scale of migrant arrivals led several countries, including Hungary, Slovenia, and ultimately Germany and Austria, temporarily to reintroduce border controls. Sweden, then getting 10,000 new arrivals each week, joined them on November 12th. The Netherlands has doubled its spot checks in the border area since September. And Denmark’s announcement that it will introduce electronic number-plate scanners at border crossings strains the limits of the Schengen framework.

The attacks in Paris have changed the debate. Ever since it became clear that the terrorists had strong links to Belgium, Peugeots coming over the border from Brussels have seemed just as great a threat to France as planes flying in from Damascus. As investigators retrace the movements of the terrorists and their weapons, more intra-European links will surely be uncovered, and more of Schengen’s weaknesses.

After last week’s attacks, France swiftly reinstated border checks at major crossings. The Schengen framework allows such temporary measures for national security; the French had been planning the move anyway for a UN climate conference in Paris later this month. Now they are pushing for more. At a meeting of justice and home-affairs ministers in Brussels on November 20th, France will ask that Europe start to collect passenger name records from those travelling within the region—which it has pressed for since the Charlie Hebdo attacks—and for further exchange of data through the Schengen Information System, a security database. France will also demand a true Europe-wide agency to police Schengen’s external borders. François Hollande, its president, said he wanted a Europe of open borders, not a continent of “walls and barbed wire”.

But others disagree, especially in the east. Hungary has already built a 100-mile fence along its Serbian border. Austria is planning one on its border with Slovenia. Slovakia’s prime minister, Robert Fico, says he too is ready to build fences (the security of Slovak citizens “is a higher priority than the rights of migrants”). After the Paris attacks Poland’s minister of European affairs declared that the EU’s deal to redistribute asylum-seekers was off. Slovakia’s election campaign has become an anti-migrant shouting match. Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, blamed migration for the killings in Paris. (He also said it increased rape and threatened Europe’s culture.)

In western Europe, right-wing populists are playing on the public’s fears. Nothing helped their cause more than the (unconfirmed) report that one of the Paris gunmen entered Europe through Greece, posing as a Syrian refugee. Marine Le Pen, who has warned for months that jihadists are posing as refugees, claimed vindication. Matteo Salvini of Italy’s right-wing Northern League repeated his call for the suspension of Schengen. In polls taken since the bombings, 70% of Dutch people say the borders should close.

Fear and loathing are not the sole response. On November 15th Germany’s interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, urged the press and society not to link the attacks to the refugee debate. The dominant line in talk shows in Germany and much of western Europe is that the refugees are victims of Islamic State’s terror, not perpetrators. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey’s president, an unlikely but necessary ally of Mrs Merkel’s, said at last week’s G20 summit that treating refugees as terrorists would be “evading humanitarian responsibility”. One important meeting was Mr Erdogan’s with Alexis Tsipras, Greece’s prime minister, on November 18th; their shared border is among the most porous on Schengen’s periphery. Until the zone’s external borders are secured, freedom of movement inside it will be in danger.

IN THE 19th century, when a Hindu merchant could not pay his debts, he would announce his insolvency by burning a lamp of ghee (clarified butter) at his doorstep. Unable to face the ignominy of default, he would flee by night, never to return. The morning after, villagers would mourn the loss of a friend and watch creditors swoop in to confiscate his house. India’s modern-day bankruptcy procedures are not as brutal and certainly not as swift.

The World Bank estimates that it takes about 4.3 years, on average, to resolve a bankruptcy case in India, more than twice as long as in China. The recovery of debts is just 25.7 cents on the dollar, one of the worst rates among developing countries. Take Kingfisher, once India’s second-biggest airline, which was grounded in 2012 with debts of more than $1.5 billion. Only this year did its creditor banks manage to seize its former headquarters in Mumbai. Unlike most other countries, India has no unified bankruptcy code, and its courts have to interpret a variety of sometimes conflicting laws that touch on insolvency.


Earlier this month the finance ministry floated proposals for a bankruptcy law that would set a hard deadline of 180 days to decide the fate of a sick firm, plus a 90-day extension if creditors agree. Bahram Vakil of AZB & Partners, a law firm, who sits on a committee advising the ministry on the reforms, says there is a “crying need” for them. At the moment, creditors cannot take any legal action against a defaulter until a restructuring plan is in place, which usually takes between three and ten years. In the mean time, the owners of sick firms retain day-to-day management control; and while they drag out court proceedings, creditors see their assets dwindle. In many cases, says a lawyer who works on such cases, the owners start up a fresh company in the name of a relative, and siphon off business from the old one.

The reform bill proposes to replace the current legal mess with a clear and rapid resolution process, designed to reduce conflicts among creditors. Now, it can take up to two years just to get a dozen or more banks to agree a common approach, says Abizer Diwanji of EY, an accounting firm. Unusually, the new law would put even unsecured creditors in front of official ones in the queue for repayment, with the intention of encouraging the development of a market in unsecured loans.

Though some current laws work in their favour, the owners of failing firms do not have it all easy. To be declared sick, and qualify for court protection, firms have to apply to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, a government agency, which will not act until the firm has frittered away half of its net worth in losses. By then it may be too late to save it. Some creditor-friendly laws result in firms being liquidated when they could have been restructured. And some labour and land laws stop firms selling property or trimming their workforce to stay in business.

If the law is passed, more sickly firms would be revived instead of being left to die slowly; and India’s banks—whose portfolio of troubled loans has quintupled to $133 billion since 2011—should get more of their money back, sooner. However, the governing Bharatiya Janata Party may struggle to get much done in the next few months, following the walloping it has just received in state-assembly elections in populous Bihar. The law should bring benefits to both business owners and their lenders. But as ever, politics may get in the way of sensible reform.

IN THE past, when flying home from a distant country, it was always my practice to bring back a litre of the local spirit from the duty-free shop. The names of these have now long escaped me: a sugary liqueur from Brazil that had a tree growing inside the bottle, something undrinkable made out of tree sap from India, a Greek concoction in a plastic container that may have been distantly related to ouzo. These delights, with exactly one shot’s-worth missing from the bottle, would, over the course of several years, shuffle their way to the back of my drinks cupboard. Then one day, when I needed the space, I would reach to the depths of my shelf looking for a likely bottle to discard, and wonder what on earth had made me think buying it was a good idea.

Nowadays I just buy gin.

Travellers spend $9 billion a year on duty-free spirits according to IWSR, a wine-and-spirits data collector. Yet flyers across the world show a singular lack of ambition for trying anything new. Using IWSR data, Vinepair, a drinks website, has put together a map of who buys what, where. Of the 13 regions it examined, Scotch was the most popular purchase in all but four. In Asia, over half of duty-free spirit sales were for whisky; in South America it accounted for 41%. Only in Central Europe and Eastern Europe (both vodka), Mexico (tequila) and the Caribbean (rum) did another spirit prevail. Apparently, Johnnie Walker alone accounts for 24% of all duty-free whisky sales. Among all spirits, Absolut vodka is a distant second, followed by Jack Daniel’s and Chivas Regal.


Duty-free is hugely important for retailers—so much so that Pernod Ricard, a French drinksmaker, refers to airports as the “sixth continent”. Perhaps one reason we are so conformist in our choices is that big brands expend so much energy enticing us during the “golden hour” between clearing security and boarding a plane that there is little chance for the local stuff to make itself seen. 

That is a shame. And foisting something local and undrinkable on travellers might also help with another problem: people who buy duty-free so that they can surreptitiously imbibe it on the plane, and who then cause a fuss. This is now apparently such a problem that one British carrier, Jet2, is considering making passengers store their booze in tamper-proof bags that can only be opened using a sharp implement (and so should be impenetrable on a plane). Alternatively, let them try to get drunk on my Indian tree-sap. I suspect a single shot will put them off.

WHEN not organising protests at the gates of Basra’s giant oilfields, jobless graduates spend their days playing dominoes on the banks of the Shatt al-Arab river. By night, giant gas flares light the sky and their game, partly compensating for the blackouts. “We provide the oil that powers the world, but live in darkness,” says a sometime protester.


The authorities dispersed the demonstrators, violently, after Lukoil, a Russian oil firm, threatened to halt production. But few predict quiet. Bereft of hope, the players debate abandoning peaceful protest and summoning the Hashad al-Shabi, the Iranian-backed militias the ayatollahs raised to beat back Islamic State (IS), to intervene on their behalf. While the world has looked north to the war on IS, local politicians argue that the south poses no less a threat. “Basra is financing Iraq,” says Ali Shaddad al-Fares, who heads the local council’s oil committee. “Iraq’s stability depends on Basra’s stability.”


Basra should be Iraq’s most successful province. It lies furthest from IS’s front lines and has a tradition as the country’s most cosmopolitan city. It remains the country’s dynamo. It has Iraq’s only ports, and oil production that generates around 95% of the government’s oil revenues. But four decades of war, sanctions, occupation, neglect and Shia infighting have rendered it decrepit and dysfunctional. Its utilities are worse than those of Mosul, Iraq’s second city, which is controlled by IS. Power cuts last most of the day. The water is stickily saline. The air is acrid from oil plumes and from sewage that dribbles into collapsed canals which once saw Basra called “the Venice of the East”. Cholera is back. “Our health was better under sanctions and Saddam Hussein,” says a local councillor.

With nothing to do, the city’s youth turn to militias for jobs. They are probably the province’s largest employer. 70% of the Hashad come from Basra, its commanders say. International oil companies might have kick-started the economy, but chose to locate all but essential operations abroad. Though local hire is cheaper, under their oil contracts, whoever they hire the Iraqi government pays. Such are the inflated costs that producing a barrel of Iraqi oil costs twice as much as in Saudi Arabia.

The oil companies argue that foreign labour is more reliable. But had the security environment been better and had Iraq paid its dues, they might have established training centres and universities in Iraq just as they did in Saudi Arabia. By sealing themselves off from Iraq, they are creating a vicious circle. As the gap between them and the locals widen, grievances mount. Worried about the prospects, Occidental Petroleum Corp, America’s fourth-largest producer, asked the government to buy back its stake in Zubair, a large southern oilfield, last month.

Iraqi politics compounds the lack of opportunity. The ruling parties in Baghdad divvy up the oil revenues before they trickle south. Their local representatives immobilise the rest. Basra’s governor, council head and mayor all belong to rival religious Shia parties. Each vetoes the others’ decisions and projects. Their militiamen jostle for control on the streets. In October 2014 Badr, the most powerful militia group, took over Saddam’s palace, from where the British ran their occupation in 2003, and pinned portraits of Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, and Shia Iraq’s own religious leader, Ali al-Sistani, on its walls. Posters of their martyrs line Basra’s highways. The limited political freedoms gained since Saddam’s fall are receding.

“We’re fooling them that they’ll have prospects,” says Rashwan Sharif, a speaker at a recent gathering of 50 computer programmers spending the weekend under the banner “No talk, all action, launch a startup in 54 hours”. “Basra is like the Titanic. It’s very rich, but on course for an iceberg.” The oil companies invited all cried off, citing prohibitive security costs. “The middle class are selling what assets they still have and are fleeing the country,” says a local journalist, who is toying with following them. Flights bound for Istanbul leave full and return half empty. But the numbers in Basra are quickly replenished. Land clearance for oilfields has triggered a rural flight, ringing the city in shantytowns. More arrive from poorer neighbouring provinces with no oil. As an urban middle class is replaced by more conservative, poorer people from the countryside, Basra’s character is changing.

“We never had tribal feuds,” says a rare local female film-maker, Kholoud Jabbar. “We were a port city. We were open to outside cultures.” Sheikh Zayed bin Nahyan, the first emir of the Emirates, is said to have so enjoyed Basra’s bars and restaurants that he used it as his model for Dubai. Its art scene was the region’s liveliest. But its open-air cinemas have long since closed under a religious ban. Basra’s old lattice balconies droop into the canals. Carved Ottoman doors fall from their hinges and clog the alleys. Restoration of the city’s grand old Jewish and Greek palaces stopped when Saddam was overthrown.  

An hour’s drive north of Basra, the city of Amara shows what could be possible. There, the Shia religious parties co-operate, holding each other to account rather than blocking each others’ projects. The province has revamped its roads and sewage system and sports flashy government buildings. Chinese contractors shop in the markets without their security escorts. Two new gas-powered plants are set to fire up next year. But much worse can happen, too. In 2013 Iraqis in the disenfranchised north-west staged months of protests, which the authorities ignored and then fiercely repressed. Islamic State took their place, offering another way.

ON THE western edge of Lake Victoria in Uganda, a hundred miles south of Kampala and an hour or so’s drive up a progressively narrower dirt track, is the site of what was meant to be one of the biggest Chinese commercial investments in Africa. A rust-flecked sign marks the entrance to “Sseesamirembe City”, part of the “Lake Victoria Free Trade Zone”. It does not mark much. Teenage boys wheel bicycles laden with water containers past mud huts and scrubby matoke (banana) fields. A few smarter houses and half-built breezeblock structures are the only evidence that there has been any development at all.

In 2008 the Lake Victoria Free Trade Zone was announced to the world as a transformative investment. Footage from CCTV, the Chinese state broadcaster, shows a meeting between Ugandan officials and Chinese ones in Beijing to confirm the deal. The investment, a partnership between a large Chinese firm and Ugandan investors, was to cover 500 square kilometres (200 square miles) of land. They proposed building a “solar-powered” airport, manufacturing facilities and a distribution hub, as well as homes and agribusiness, all adding up to a new “eco-city”. Some $1.5 billion would be invested in one of the least developed parts of Uganda. It was suggested that thousands of Chinese farmers might settle the land and grow crops for export to China.


Of all these bold promises, none came to fruition. As China’s involvement in Africa deepens, and Western policymakers worry about whether they can compete with a flood of Chinese cash, the failed project is evidence of the mixed success of China’s scramble for Africa. It is true that new railways and roads funded by China’s Export-Import Bank, and its investment in copper mines and oil rigs in places such as Zambia and Angola, are changing the face of the continent. Airports in Kinshasa, Luanda and Addis Ababa buzz with Mandarin. But there is growing evidence that some Chinese firms that leap into Africa are struggling with the same problems Africa has long given Western investors.

Reliable figures on the levels of Chinese investment in Africa are hard to come by. But those published by the Chinese Ministry of Commerce suggest the net annual flow of Chinese direct investment into Africa increased eight-fold between 2005 and 2014, to $3.2 billion. The total stock of Chinese investments grew twenty-fold, to $32 billion. Direct comparisons to Western figures are harder still, but that makes China one of Africa’s biggest investors. In addition, Chinese aid has increased, as have development loans made through the Export-Import Bank, which finances infrastructure projects built by Chinese firms.


However, according to Deborah Brautigam, a professor at the School of Advanced International Studies in Washington, DC, much of the hype about Chinese firms buying up vast amounts of industry in Africa is overblown. Chinese FDI to Africa constitutes less than 3% of all Chinese foreign investment: vastly more goes to other regions, especially Asia. Growth has slowed in recent years. And, as Ms Brautigam shows in a new book investigating agricultural projects, “Will Africa Feed China?”, many heavily-reported Chinese projects do not amount to much.

There was, for example, a widely touted Chinese investment of over $1 billion in a 3m hectare palm-oil plantation (an area roughly the size of Hawaii) in the Democratic Republic of Congo. But when work started the Chinese found that there were no roads, the river was barely navigable and villagers were hostile. When a small amount of land was planted the crop was immediately stolen. The project soon disappeared.

The same applies to many mineral extraction projects. In Congo, a deal struck in 2007 to swap $6 billion of Chinese infrastructure funding for profits from copper mining has produced less than $1 billion of investment so far. Production of the copper has been perpetually delayed by bureaucracy and a lack of electricity; observers in Kinshasa say that they are not expecting more Chinese money soon. Private Chinese miners have not had much more luck.

A common problem is that Chinese firms “sort of assume that it works the way it does in China”, says Ms Brautigam. “In China, a company comes in, makes an arrangement with local government, and the government delivers.” In Africa, they then discover that government promises to build infrastructure, provide power or supply land are not as credible as they thought. Public land turns out to be occupied by squatters, who may have farmed it for generations; private land may not be owned by the people selling it. Local politicians do not accept deals struck by national ones.

Increasingly, Chinese firms are adapting to these conditions. Huang Hongxiang, who runs China House, an organisation in Nairobi that helps Chinese firms understand how to do business in Kenya, says that there was a gold-rush mentality for a while: “If you told banks you’re going to Africa, it was easy to get a loan.” But now investors are aware that projects in Africa can take a long time and cost a lot more money than they expected. Mr Huang says they are now doing the sorts of things Western firms have long done: investing in corporate social responsibility programmes, hiring African managers and doing scrupulous due diligence.

Western politicians have long worried that China is conducting a new form of imperialism in Africa: getting a jump by dealing with unscrupulous governments and breaking the rules. This is based on a grain of truth: the Chinese are far more willing to work with the Angolan government, for example, one of the world’s most oppressive. But the evidence is increasingly that the Chinese are following a well-trodden path. They do not have a unique ability to make their projects in Africa work where Western firms cannot. For Western policymakers that may come as a relief. For African leaders, desperate for development but unwilling or unable to fix problems that deter all but the hardiest of investors, it may come as a disappointment.

THE fer-de-lance (spearhead) pit viper is not an animal you would want to meet unexpectedly. It is aggressive, unpredictable and fond of getting the drop on its prey: literally, from the branches of trees. Its bite, which turns blood into something with the consistency of jam, is fatal if not treated immediately. Terrible as its venom is, though, it may have a use. Jeffrey Hartgerink, a chemist at Rice University, in Houston, Texas, thinks it could be just the thing to stop post-operative bleeding.

Loss of blood is an inevitable consequence of surgery. At the moment it is dealt with by a combination of the body’s natural clotting mechanisms and a variety of physical barriers designed to stanch blood flow and give those clotting mechanisms time to act. These barriers include the simple application of pressure to a wound, various foams and adhesives that create a more permanent seal, and experimental treatments using substances called hydrogels which consist of fragments of protein laced together to trap water molecules, and which are reckoned particularly effective at blocking wounds up.


For many people, these are enough. But some—especially those on anti-clotting drugs like warfarin, which are prescribed to prevent heart attacks, strokes and pulmonary thromboses—are at particular risk. If such a patient needs surgery in a hurry, and cannot be taken off his medication sufficiently in advance of going under the knife, then he may be in danger of bleeding to death.

On the face of things, and particularly for these people, a substance that triggers clotting should be better than mere physical barriers. The problem has always been to keep the clotting agent only where it is needed, and prevent it spreading through the rest of the body, where it could do serious and possibly lethal harm. Dr Hartgerink thinks, as he describes in a study just published in Biomaterials Science and Engineering, that he may have worked out how to do this.

He started with a hydrogel. If such a substance traps water, he reasoned, it should also trap batroxobin, fer-de-lance venom’s active ingredient. So it proved. He then had to determine whether, if the gel were applied to a wound, the batroxobin would leak out of it at the appropriate rate—ie, fast enough to seal the wound, but not so fast as to escape into the bloodstream and cause systemic problems.

Experiments on rats suggest it does. Dr Hartgerink and his colleagues tested their batroxobin-laced hydrogel on a group of the rodents. Half of these had been given heparin, a powerful anticoagulant; the other half had not. The researchers then operated on the rats’ livers, making incisions in those organs and thus inducing bleeding, after which they applied various haemorrhage-stanching methods.

Batroxobin-laden hydrogel stopped the flow in 5-6 seconds, regardless of whether a rat had been given heparin. The hydrogel by itself was also quite effective in heparin-free rats (it stanched bleeding in 11 seconds), but took two minutes if a rat had been heparinised. GelFoam, a commercially available wound-barrier made from purified pig skin, also struggled when used on heparinised animals. It failed to stop blood flow within two minutes. Puramatrix, a proprietary hydrogel being tested for clinical use, did better—but still took 19 seconds. Batroxobin-impregnated hydrogel thus looks as if it might make a useful addition to the surgeon’s armoury. The spearhead of a new approach, as it were.

IF YOU want to build an atom bomb, land men on the Moon or work out the exact order of the 3 billion chemical “letters” in the DNA of the human genome, then Big Science, a large-scale project backed by a budget in the billions, will do it for you. But will it also do it for the brain, the understanding of which is, perhaps, the biggest scientific challenge of all? That is a question with particular salience now, as the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) initiative gets going in earnest.

At the moment this endeavour, announced by Barack Obama in April 2013, is definitely small science—despite its proposed budget of $4.8 billion over the next decade. According to Rafael Yuste of Columbia University, who was one of its instigators, some 125 laboratories around America have signed up to dip their bread in the gravy, so that gravy is very thinly spread. This reflects the way neuroscience has been done until now, but Dr Yuste would like the future to be different. Genetics was similarly fragmented before the Human Genome Project began, but the bargain imposed on researchers by that project was that the process of sequencing would be centralised into a few laboratories, where it could be industrialised. This, as Dr Yuste and several of his co-sponsors of the original idea of BRAIN write this month in Neuron, is the model they think neuroscience should now adopt.


BRAIN’s specific remit, they point out, is to develop new technological approaches for the study of brains. For that purpose, they propose creating a handful of “brain observatories” which would design and build the equipment, and then make it available to teams of outside researchers, much as academic astronomers book (and pay for) time on large telescopes. In this way, the observatories could concentrate on the engineering: refining the equipment by experience and arriving at designs that might then be commercialised.  

Manhattan-project transfer
Dr Yuste and his colleagues identify four types of technology that BRAIN needs. Three are improvements of existing methods. The fourth is largely terra incognita.

The first of the improvements is better computing power. Even the task of mapping a mouse brain will require 500 petabytes of data storage. A petabyte is 1m gigabytes. For comparison, finding the Higgs boson required about 200 petabytes. A human brain is vastly more complex than a mouse’s. It has around 86 billion neurons, compared with 71m in a mouse. And the wiring that links these neurons (cell protrusions called axons) is reckoned to be about 100,000km long.

The second improvement that is required of existing technology involves brain-scanning. At the moment, this has a resolution measured at best in millimetres, which is fine for its original purpose—clinical diagnosis—but useless for understanding how brains work at anything more than a superficial level. Higher-resolution scanners would permit researchers to look at small, functional groups of neurons, such as the neuronal columns of which brain cortexes are composed.

The third improvement Dr Yuste desires is to instruments that can study the connections between individual neurons, a field known as connectomics. At the moment, this can be done only to dead brains, and the tools usually employed are electron microscopes. As with many other fields, the more closely you want to look, the bigger the machines you need to do it. Dr Yuste and his colleagues would also like to overlay on the three-dimensional electron-micrographs of connectomics information from other machines, such as high-resolution fluorescent microscopes, which can detect the molecules present in particular parts of neurons.

That leads to the unknown land. This is the designing of nanoscale devices (ie, instruments whose dimensions are measured in billionths of a metre) which can do something approaching connectomics on living brains, by studying the activities of hundreds or thousands of interconnected neurons simultaneously. Only in this way can the true nature of the brain’s circuitry be understood.

Asking what these nanoscale devices will look like tends to generate a lot of handwaving involving words like “quantum dots” and “nanodiamonds”—both types of tiny crystal that might act as neuron-scale probes—but with little clear idea of how these crystal probes would be controlled and listened to. In their case, then, there is an argument for letting a thousand flowers bloom in laboratories large and small. But for the other devices on Dr Yuste’s shopping list, observatories do seem a good idea. And, as luck would have it, America has a network of institutions that might be pressed into service as such.

Critical mass
The National Laboratories, are, in many ways, Big Science personified. A lot of them started life as atomic-weapons establishments, so they know how to run large projects that go on for years. They also house five of the world’s ten fastest supercomputers. One, indeed, is ready and eager to go. Argonne, near Chicago, has been hiring out one of its instruments, an X-ray generator called the Advanced Photon Source, to biologists for several years. Last year, 2,000 of the 5,000 experiments conducted using it were biological, and Argonne has recently hired a neuroscientist specifically to run a project that will employ the photon source to X-ray mouse brains, with a view to mapping them at high resolution. It is also buying a top-of-the-range electron microscope, with which researchers will be able to zoom in on areas of the brain the photon source suggests are particularly interesting, and a flashy, new computer that will help analyse the results of all this. Argonne’s director, Peter Littlewood, thus hopes to create a model which other national laboratories thinking of developing brain observatories might follow.

Whether they do will depend a lot on the say-so of Ernest Moniz, America’s energy secretary, who is the labs’ collective supremo. He and Francis Collins, head of the country’s National Institutes of Health (and thus, in effect, BRAIN’s treasurer), have met several times to chew the matter over. Some in Congress think the energy department should be minding its own business. Dr Moniz, an astute politician, understands this. But he is also a scientist to his fingertips, for he was once head of the physics department at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. That he will turn down the chance to be part of what may become the scientific adventure of the 21st century seems unlikely.

FEW vaccines have been so successful, so quickly, as MenAfriVac. It was introduced into Africa in 2010, to immunise people against meningitis A—a bacterial infection of the membranes surrounding the brain and the spinal cord, which can cause death or brain damage within hours of the onset of its flu-like symptoms. Since then, the caseload of the illness has plummeted to zero in 16 countries that used MenAfriVac in mass vaccination campaigns. Before the vaccine’s introduction epidemics in the “meningitis belt”, which stretches from coast to coast south of the Sahara desert (see map), used to kill thousands a year and disable many more, nearly all of them children and young adults. In 1996, for example, an outbreak killed 25,000 people and sickened 250,000 in six months.

Out of sight is, however, all too frequently out of mind, and health experts now worry that this one-off success will not, at least in some countries, be followed by the introduction of MenAfriVac into routine schedules of infant vaccination. A study just published in Clinical Infectious Diseases by Andromachi Karachaliou of Cambridge University and her colleagues shows what this could lead to. Ms Karachaliou’s computer model predicts that the epidemics will return with a vengeance in about 15 years if MenAfriVac does not become a routine childhood jab, as the World Health Organisation (WHO) recommends it should. That, the model suggests, is the moment when waning immunity among those already vaccinated, and no immunity at all among a rising generation of the unvaccinated, could combine with seasonal factors (epidemics usually start in the dry season) to create a crisis.

In principle, universal vaccination could eradicate the disease, for the bacterium that causes it can survive only in humans and vaccination clears it from its hosts. The current goal, however, is less ambitious: to stop the epidemics in all 26 countries of the belt, including the ten which have yet to roll out the one-time mass-vaccination campaigns that have done so much good elsewhere. These campaigns cover only those aged between one and 29. That is, nevertheless, about 70% of Africa’s population—and this, combined with the fact that older people are much less infectious and rarely succumb to the disease, is enough to create “herd” protection, according to Marie-Pierre Preziosi, a meningitis expert at the WHO. Herd protection is the point at which, even though vaccine coverage is not 100%, there are insufficient infectible people around for the disease to sustain itself.

To keep a proper lid on meningitis A, though, the next step should be to make vaccination routine for infants and remain vigilant for outbreaks. Gavi, an international vaccine fund for poor countries, has already promised its backing for this plan. Besides saving lives, such an approach would save money. A second paper in Clinical Infectious Diseases, describing a study led by Anaïs Colombini of the WHO, looked at how routine vaccination might play out in Burkina Faso. Ms Colombini concluded that such a pre-emptive approach would cost less than the alternative of waiting for an outbreak and then vaccinating en masse. This would probably be the case in other countries of the belt, too.

Moreover, MenAfriVac brings benefits beyond curbing meningitis, as two further studies published in the same journal show. These looked at its effect on tetanus. The MenAfriVac uses tetanus toxoid as the protein to which the immunity-generating antigen is attached. Other vaccines that employ a similar trick are known to boost immunity to tetanus. In one of the studies, Nicole Basta of the University of Minnesota and her colleagues have shown that this process works for MenAfriVac, too. Their research, carried out in Mali, found that the mass campaign increased the share of people with long-term tetanus immunity from 20% to 59%. This makes MenAfriVac a formidable tetanus booster, even though it is not strong enough to stand alone against tetanus, says Dr Preziosi.

What this means for neonatal tetanus, which kills nearly 50,000 newborns a year in sub-Saharan Africa, is shown by the second study, led by Ray Borrow of Manchester Royal Infirmary, in Britain. Poor countries now tackle it by giving pregnant women tetanus boosters, which ensure they pass antibodies on to their unborn babies. Dr Borrow’s team found that rates of neonatal tetanus fell by 25% in countries that had had a MenAfriVac campaign. Although some of this drop may have happened for other reasons, the evidence points mostly in the direction of the vaccine’s hefty double-duty.

All of this makes MenAfriVac one of the brightest public-health stars around. For, if countries in the meningitis belt follow the prescription these studies suggest, they should be able, quickly, to put the lid on two scourges for the price of one.
