“I watched when the World Trade Center came tumbling down,” he told a crowd in Birmingham, Ala., on Saturday. “And I watched in Jersey City, New Jersey, where thousands and thousands of people were cheering as that building was coming down.”

No news reports exist of people cheering in the streets, and both police officials and the mayor of Jersey City have said that it did not happen. An Internet rumor about people cheering in the streets, which said it was in Paterson, not Jersey City, has been denied numerous times by city and police officials.

But when pressed on Sunday by George Stephanopoulos in an interview, Mr. Trump emphatically stuck to his story.

“It did happen, I saw it,” Mr. Trump said. “It was on television. I saw it.”

When reminded that police said it didn’t happen, Mr. Trump again insisted that he saw it.

“I know it might be not politically correct for you to talk about it, but there were people cheering as that building came down — as those buildings came down. And that tells you something,” he said. “It was well covered at the time, George.”

In New Hampshire on Sunday, Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey said he had no recollection of state residents celebrating the terror attacks in 2001.

“I think if it had happened, I would remember it,” Mr. Christie said.

Also on Sunday, Mr. Trump reiterated many of his emphatic, if controversial, positions in the wake of the terrorist attacks in Paris. He said he would not unequivocally rule out a database on all Muslims and that he wants a database of refugees and surveillance of certain mosques.

He also said that he would bring back interrogation techniques like waterboarding.

“We have to be strong,” he said in response to Mr. Stephanopoulos’s question. “You know, they don’t use waterboarding over there; they use chopping off people’s heads. They use drowning people.”

When asked if that meant he would bring back waterboarding, Mr. Trump said, “We have to — I would bring it back, yes. I would bring it back. I think waterboarding is peanuts compared to what they’d do to us.”

The terrorist attacks in Paris dominated the Sunday news shows, as every presidential candidate’s interviews focused nearly exclusively on the attacks. And each candidate tried to point to his record as evidence of why he is best positioned to defeat the Islamic State.

Mr. Christie reiterated, as he often has on the campaign trail, that he is the only candidate “who has actually done this before,” pointing to his tenure as United States attorney for New Jersey, when he “brought two of the most major terrorism cases this country has brought in the aftermath of September 11.”

Mr. Christie called for rebuilding the intelligence programs, in particular the National Security Agency’s metadata collection program, during his interview on CNN’s “State of the Union.”

Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, whose appearance on “Fox News Sunday” was timed with the release of his first television ad, which also focused on the Paris attacks, laid out a detailed plan on how to combat the Islamic State in Syria, including by expanding air strikes and providing arms, training and American troops to help arm “Arab Sunnis” to combat terrorists in Syria.

“There will have to be American operators embedded alongside them,” he said. “Special operators are combat troops. This is not a return to Iraq. We’re not talking about 100,000 people or 50,000 armed soldiers.”

Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon, also called for increased intelligence gathering, and pointed to his record as a surgeon to show his readiness in the face of emergencies.

“I would be willing to say that I probably have more 2 a.m.-in-the-morning experience than everybody else running combined, making life and death decisions,” Mr. Carson said in an appearance on “This Week” on ABC.

The focus on the Paris attacks dominated the interviews despite a series of new polls released early Sunday morning, all with Mr. Trump holding a commanding lead in both nationwide and state-specific polling.

But his strong standing among Republicans was not enough for Mr. Trump to again reverse his position on a possible independent run.
“I will see what happens,” he said in response to a question about a potential independent run. “I have to be treated fairly.”

Marco Rubio’s campaign is hitting the airwaves, releasing its first television ad on Sunday.

Mr. Rubio’s first ad focuses exclusively on the Paris attacks and the issue of national security. It will run nationwide on cable networks; the Rubio campaign did not say how much it was spending to air the ad.

The ad is simple: Mr. Rubio appears before a black background and speaks directly to the camera, with a slim black shadow creeping into his visage from the side of the camera.

“What happened in Paris could happen here,” Mr. Rubio says in the ad. “There is no middle ground.”

The context of the ad is a binary choice of “us or them.” Mr. Rubio has tried to portray himself in this election contest as the strongest choice to combat terrorism around the world.

The ad closes with a slightly longer riff than the usually rushed approval: “I’m Marco Rubio. I approve this message because there can be no arrangement or negotiation. Either they win or we do.”

Drones are expected to be hot sellers this holiday season. Now it looks as if owners of nearly all those machines will have to register with the federal government and have the information placed in a national database, as officials look to address concerns over safety and the mischief caused by unmanned aircraft.

The proposed regulations were outlined in a report released on Monday by the Federal Aviation Administration. The recommendations came from a task force created by the agency and are widely expected to be approved in a few weeks, ahead of what is expected to be a big increase of drone owners after Christmas.

The Consumer Technology Association, a trade group, has estimated that 400,000 drones will be sold this holiday season.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Bits Blog: Drone Maker DJI Adds Technology to Limit Where Its Machines Can FlyNOV. 17, 2015
Gentlemen, Start Your DronesNOV. 11, 2015
video Drones MisbehavingNOV. 26, 2014
An Amazon delivery drone is shown in this 2013 handout photo. The F.A.A. has given the company permission to conduct test flights of its drones during daylight hours.Amazon Wins Approval to Test Delivery Drones OutdoorsMARCH 19, 2015
Now, Anyone Can Buy a Drone. Heaven Help Us.NOV. 26, 2014
The task force said that in addition to being entered in a federal database, drone owners should display a government-issued registration number on the machines. It recommended that owners submit their names and addresses, but said email addresses and phone numbers should be optional. The rules would apply to drones weighing half a pound to 55 pounds.

The task force did not go as far with its recommendations as some advocates of stricter regulations had hoped. It said owners of aircraft should not have to submit any information about their aircraft, for example. It also said there should not be a requirement for drone users to be citizens or permanent residents.

The task force wrote that the goal of the registration process was to “ensure accountability by creating a traceable link between aircraft and owner, and to encourage the maximum levels of regulatory compliance by making the registration process as simple as possible.”

Task force members included representatives of drone makers, technology companies, an airline pilots association and government officials. They stressed that many compromises were made.

“We tried to write it in as generic a flavor as possible,” Dave Vos, a member of the task force and the head of a drone project at Google X, a business that works on future technologies, said in a conference call.

With the “consensus we reached, everyone is quite happy here,” he said.

The recommendations will be considered as part of official rules for drones being developed by the F.A.A. But the agency pushed for the task force to complete its report before the holiday season.

The F.A.A. will receive comments on the report before considering the recommendations for final rules.

A giant cardboard picture, tattered by time, rests against a wall in Joshua Adams’s home. It shows a radiant young woman with an Auburn University corsage hugging the university’s mascot, a tiger. She is Auburn’s homecoming queen — and Mr. Adams’s mother.

The university dominates this city of 60,000, with football its spiritual center. And as Mr. Adams will attest, sports competition extends beyond the field. “Betting for me started when I was 13 years old,” he said, adding that bookies were never hard to find.

Years later, Mr. Adams relished joining his college pals in Atlanta, where they would throw a modest sum of money into a pot and select their fantasy football teams for a season-long competition. “It was one of the most fun days of the year,” he said. “People were getting married and having kids, and this was the one time we would all come together.”


By then, Mr. Adams knew he had a gambling problem, but games with a single payout after the season did not seem to him like gambling. It was very different, though, when the action became daily, offering quick payouts, hundreds of bets each day and six-figure cash prizes. Mr. Adams called it “a game changer” — and counselors say they are seeing people like Mr. Adams and are expecting many more.

“It would be akin to an alcoholic finding out about a whole new street of bars that he never knew about — exciting, great bars,” he said. “For an addict, it wasn’t what I needed.” Mr. Adams said he had lost $20,000 in daily fantasy games and tens of thousands more in illegal sports bets. His life, consumed by gambling, disintegrated to where he considered suicide.

Mr. Adams’s story, and others like it, have been largely absent from the cacophony of voices debating whether fantasy sports — an unregulated multibillion-dollar industry financed by media companies, hedge funds and professional sports organizations — constitutes gambling.

The fantasy companies say their daily games are not gambling, contending that the games involve more skill than luck. “Our product is all about entertainment value,” said Matt King, chief financial officer of FanDuel, one of the largest daily fantasy sports providers.

Continue reading the main story

In 2006, Congress tried to crack down on illegal online sports betting. Today, Internet wagering is thriving, and a new business that resembles gambling, fantasy sports, is winning millions of players and stoking controversy. The Times, with the PBS series “Frontline,” investigated illegal gambling in the Internet age.

Sign Me Up
Have a question or anonymous tip?
Increasingly, that view is coming under attack, notably by New York’s attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman. Two weeks ago, Mr. Schneiderman ordered FanDuel and its major competitor, DraftKings, to stop accepting bets from New Yorkers because their games constituted illegal gambling under state law. Both companies are contesting that order in court.

For people like Mr. Adams, now in his mid-30s, this battle is about more than just the letter of the law. In the unregulated world of fantasy sports, it is also about the absence of safeguards to protect problem gamblers and younger adults.

“Absolutely it is gambling,” said Mr. Adams, who holds a master’s degree in rural sociology and considers himself a child of privilege. “I wish I never would have gotten back into playing fantasy sports, because for me, and I think for compulsive gamblers, it leads us right back into a destructive state.”

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

Fantasy games appeal to the demographic most likely to develop gambling problems — young men, who researchers say are more prone to taking risks. FanDuel readily admits that it targets millennials.

Fantasy contests have become so popular, and their advertisements so ubiquitous, that gambling counselors say young children are now playing with their fathers or, in some cases, by themselves. Neva Pryor, who counsels gamblers in New Jersey, said that at a recent conference, teachers were saying that on Monday mornings, “all the students talk about is fantasy sports.”

Most people can play daily fantasy or casino games without a problem. “I know there are people that can do it normally,” Mr. Adams said, but he is not one of them. He also acknowledges that he ultimately bears responsibility for his addiction.

Yet gambling counselors say they could more easily help people like Mr. Adams if fantasy companies did not portray their games as involving mostly skill. That alone is a risk for addiction, said Keith Whyte, executive director of the National Council on Problem Gambling.

“The perception of skill has led many, many people down a very dark path,” he said.

Seeking Help

The difference between regulated and unregulated betting is evident in the websites of casinos and fantasy companies.

Because online betting is legal in New Jersey, the Borgata casino can offer Pick the Pros, where players must select winning football teams for a shot at $200,000. Borgata’s home page includes the note, “Gambling Problem? Call 1-800-GAMBLER.” That number connects to a help hotline.

With problem gamblers, the Borgata said, “We believe it is our responsibility to offer information and assistance.”

In contrast, fantasy players may bet thousands of dollars a day, yet neither FanDuel nor DraftKings mentions 1-800-GAMBLER on its website. “We have consistently urged them to list our help line and website,” Mr. Whyte said. Mr. Adams said his first step toward breaking his addiction had occurred when he saw the 1-800 number — but it was not on a fantasy sports site.

In the wake of the New York attorney general’s legal challenge, DraftKings changed its website a week ago to warn that playing fantasy sports could be a “stress-inducer.” But the word “gambling” does not appear, nor does the help line. Instead, the company refers players to the National Center for Responsible Gaming, a research group funded in part by the casino industry.

Photo

To break his addiction, Mr. Adams spent 25 days in a rehabilitation center and continued meetings at Gamblers Anonymous. Credit Raymond McCrea Jones for The New York Times
That group “is not a consumer protection advocate,” Mr. Whyte said. “They do good research and are a fine group, but they don’t provide direct services to problem gamblers like we do.”

FanDuel said in a statement: “In any nascent, disruptive industry, important questions are often raised about how the industry should operate. Fantasy sports is no different, and we are reviewing our policies and practices to ensure consumers have a positive experience on our site.” The company said it already had a process by which players could opt out of games.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

DraftKings issued a statement saying “we are continuously optimizing our site to ensure our product is best in class and this includes consumer protections.”

Players who bet excessively are usually the last to recognize it, underscoring the need, counselors say, for fantasy sites to list warning signs, such as lying about time or money lost to betting.

Mr. Adams said he routinely lied to get money — for example, telling his parents he needed a new roof. “I don’t know how many roofs I’ve put on my house,” he said.

Problem gamblers also deceive themselves, believing their luck will turn.

“What’s interesting about daily fantasy, the way the marketing works, is that you have new winners every day or every weekend,” said Daniel Trolaro, who educates people on compulsive gambling. “So for the problem gambler who thinks that he or she is simply one bet away from winning back and solving their problems, they have ample opportunity on a daily basis to do that.”

Even gamblers who have decided to stop playing fantasy sports have trouble breaking away.

Jennifer Alfert, a certified gambling counselor in Boca Raton, Fla., said a client who had quit gambling confided that, in September, DraftKings had offered to let him play for free if he signed up a friend — which he did, and he won $35.

“Rather than wait for a relapse,” Ms. Alfert said, “I opted to intervene.” So in October, she said, she asked her client, whom she identified only by his first name, Matt, to ask DraftKings to block his access.

“I no longer wish to be able to bet,” Matt told the company in an email. “Additionally I would like the balance of my winnings in the form of a check to a cause to help gamblers.”

Instead of acting promptly upon his request, DraftKings emailed him promotional materials that included statements like: “You Scored Big! Your invite is inside: Claim your FREE Entry” and “We’ve selected you for this! Your shot at winning $100K tonight.”

Matt has yet to receive his money, Ms. Alfert said.

Different Approaches

On Thursday, Massachusetts joined Nevada and New York in seeking to corral fantasy betting. But while Nevada and New York have banned daily fantasy games, Massachusetts opted to regulate it by proposing safeguards.

The attorney general, Maura Healey, said in a statement that the regulations were intended to protect minors and to ensure fair competition and truthful advertising.

Massachusetts will no longer allow anyone under age 21 to play daily fantasy sports. Operators say they accept only players who are 18 or older, but players as young as 14 are playing daily fantasy, according to the Council on Compulsive Gambling of New Jersey. The Times interviewed a player who began betting at 15.

The council’s director, Neva Pryor, said fantasy sites should require players to prove their age with a driver’s license. “There’s no age control, really,” Ms. Pryor said. “You can simply open an account in your name, check a box, and put in whatever age you want to put in.” Parents have opened accounts for children.

Photo

DraftKings, a daily fantasy sports site, advertises a fantasy college football world championship.
Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

Massachusetts also wants to limit how daily fantasy companies entice college students. DraftKings offers a fantasy college basketball competition and a chance to win a share of $1 million as the “Fantasy College Football World Champion.”

Under the state’s proposal, operators could no longer offer contests involving colleges.

Daily fantasy companies have until Jan. 22 to comment on the proposal. Both DraftKings and FanDuel have said they prefer Ms. Healey’s approach to Mr. Schneiderman’s.

FanDuel said Massachusetts’s approach “makes a tremendous amount of sense.” DraftKings offered a more tempered response. “While we do have some concerns with the draft regulations, we intend to work closely with the Attorney General’s office to ensure we are operating in the best interest of our customers,” the company said.

A Gambler’s Way Back

One day last week, Mr. Adams rolled up his sleeve to show a tattoo of a bar code and a date in May 2014. He wanted a reminder of the day he began to reclaim his life — his last bet.


It was on a tennis match, not that he knew much about tennis, nor about Japanese basketball. He bet on that, too. The bar code is a reminder of how much money he has lost.

Breaking his addiction required 25 days in a rehabilitation center and continuing meetings at Gamblers Anonymous. The final step of recovery is to help other gamblers, and that is why he is telling his story, of the people he hurt, of the lost days he can never recover.

“In Gamblers Anonymous, we talk about prison, insanity or death,” he said. “The three aren’t mutually exclusive. I think I was definitely on my way to all three of those places.”

The posters, put up by a year-old student group called the Black Justice League, featured some of Wilson’s more offensive quotes, including his comment to an African-American leader that “segregation is not humiliating, but a benefit, and ought to be so regarded by you,” and led to a remarkable two days at this genteel campus last week.

After a walkout by about 200 students, and the presentation by the Black Justice League of a list of demands, about 15 students occupied the office of the president, Christopher L. Eisgruber, overnight on Wednesday. On Thursday, Mr. Eisgruber agreed to begin discussions on campus and with trustees about the demands.

At the top of the group’s list was a demand that the university “publicly acknowledge the racist legacy of Woodrow Wilson” and take steps to rename the public policy school and residential college.

While naming decisions are up to the university’s board of trustees (which includes Mr. Eisgruber), Mr. Eisgruber promised to push for removing a large mural of Wilson from the residential college’s dining room and to direct the trustees to survey “the campus community’s opinion” on the Wilson School name and then vote on it.

The protesters also called for mandatory courses on “the history of marginalized peoples,” for “cultural competency training” for the staff and the faculty and for the creation of dedicated housing and meeting space for those interested in black culture.

But as Princeton takes its turn in the national roll call of college campuses where long-festering issues of race have burst into the open, spurred by events in places like Ferguson, Mo., and Charleston, S.C., it is not surprising that the conversation would pivot around Wilson, an alumnus.

“In some ways, that’s the role that symbols play in American politics and culture,” Mr. Eisgruber said in a phone interview on Sunday before sending an email addressing the issue to the university community. “People become very invested in symbols. And one of the benefits of having a genuine public discussion, informed by scholarly opinion, about some of these questions is that it can help educate people about problems that go beyond the symbol in our society.”


In the wake of the sit-in, students were divided on the renaming; even many sympathetic to the Black Justice League’s other demands said that expunging Wilson’s name went too far, or was unlikely to serve a constructive purpose, or both.

Photo

Thomas Woodrow Wilson in 1903, when he was president of Princeton University. Credit Universal History Archive/Getty Images
A counterpetition circulating on Change.org called the proposal a “dangerous precedent” for future students who “seek to purge the past of those who fail to live up to modern standards of morality,” as well as a bid to erase Wilson’s positive contributions.

But one Black Justice League member, Wilglory Tanjong, rejected that argument.


Raised in the South, he wrote of “a great Ku Klux Klan” that rose up to rid whites of “the intolerable burden of governments sustained by the votes of ignorant Negroes.”

During Wilson’s tenure as president of Princeton, no blacks were admitted — “The whole temper and tradition of the place are such that no Negro has ever applied,” he wrote — though Harvard and Yale had admitted blacks decades earlier. Princeton admitted its first black student in the 1940s.

At Princeton today, Black Justice League members said they had often felt excluded and continually if subtly called on to justify their presence at one of the nation’s top schools.

They protest the fact that only about 2 percent of the faculty is black (the student body is around 8 percent black).

And for some students, Wilson’s name and image around campus feel like constant reminders that they are not entirely welcome.

“It’s a haunting,” said Ozioma Obi-Onuoha of the Black Justice League, a senior majoring in politics who grew up in North Carolina.

Online, sometimes under the cloak of anonymity, many people mocked the group’s efforts.

“Will the proposed Black Cultural Space have its own water fountain?” a commenter on a Daily Princetonian story asked.

But in the dining hall of Wilson College on Friday, against the backdrop of the Wilson mural, made from a photograph of the president throwing a first pitch at a baseball game, students took the debate seriously.

“I’m a little bit torn,” said Takim Williams, a senior majoring in philosophy who is black. “My race has never been a disadvantage to me — at least that’s how I view it — so I haven’t had the same visceral reaction.”

He said he found the renaming idea “drastic.” His tablemate Calvert Chan, a sophomore who is Asian-American, said, “If the criteria for naming a building for someone was that they’d be perfect, we shouldn’t name buildings.”

Nearby, Amina Simon, who is white and took part in the protests, said Wilson’s name did not belong on a dorm complex “where you’re expected to have residential college spirit and cheer for Wilson College.” For black students, she said, “having to identify yourself with the name of someone who did not build this place for you is unfair.”

Across campus on Friday evening, as she walked out of the soaring atrium of the public policy school, the school’s dean, Cecilia Rouse, who is black, declined to take a position.

“I think we have to look at what it means to change the name of an internationally known school,” she said. “Our alumni are identified with the Woodrow Wilson School, so it’s not an easy decision.”

But she added: “I think it’s an important conversation for our students, for our faculty, for our staff, to really understand the many dimensions of Princeton’s legacy with race. I actually think it’s a very good thing.”

A voice over the intercom delivers the bad news, and throughout the car there are audible sighs.

Your train is delayed because of a sick passenger.

Subway riders sit and wonder: Who is this sick passenger, and why is he or she on my train? Any sympathy for the mysterious person is often mixed with annoyance.

At the same time, an intricate effort unfolds out of sight. The train’s crew alerts the rail control center to send an ambulance to the nearest station. The emergency medical workers rush below ground to locate the patient — often a challenge in more labyrinthine stations.

This process can stretch on for more than half an hour, creating a cascade of delays across the vast system. And so the not-sick passengers wait. And wait. Statistics show they are waiting more than ever these days.

Hold on tight (but wash those hands).New York Today: New York Today: Queasy RiderNOV. 23, 2015
Sick passengers have accounted for about 3,000 train delays each month this year in New York City, a figure that has grown drastically in recent years, up from about 1,800 each month in 2012, according to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. The authority alerts riders to the incidents on Twitter, and some have responded by voicing frustration over the disruptions.

Photo

Casey Blue James, center, on the E train this month. After falling ill on a subway in 2013, she said she was more sympathetic to delays caused by sick passengers. Credit Sam Hodgson for The New York Times
Yet despite the frequency of these delays, they remain a persistent riddle for many riders who have no idea what exactly the phrase “sick passenger” means.

Officials at the authority say the incidents often involve riders who have fainted or vomited. Other passengers might have had a heart attack or a seizure, or could be unconscious or even dead. A sick customer is not, as some surmise, a suicide on the tracks, which workers are instructed to announce as a “police investigation.”

The timing and location of a delay can determine how many riders are affected. In September, as crowds of people streamed into the subway after the pope’s visit to Central Park, an A train screeched to a halt just north of West 72nd Street. Someone had pulled the emergency brake in the last car to report that a young woman felt sick.

Nelson Ortiz, the leader of a subway emergency response team stationed nearby in case problems arose during the papal event, told the train crew to proceed to the next express station, at 125th Street. The woman ultimately declined medical help, and the train continued on. But the incident at 6:05 p.m. caused a 13-minute delay in the middle of the evening rush, long enough to delay 11 trains.

In a subway system with as many as six million riders a day and 469 stations, some riders are bound to get sick.

The number of delays caused by sick passengers has fluctuated this year, with an uptick during March and April, statistics show. The authority does not know exactly why.

One Twitter post announced last week, for instance: Northbound “#2 & #5 trains delayed due to a sick customer at E 180 St. Allow additional travel time.”

The other top reasons for delays include overcrowding, equipment problems and bad weather. As the aging system — which first opened more than a century ago — struggles to handle booming ridership, the overall number of train delays has also increased.

After a delay this month on an N train Susie Moy was riding, she took to Twitter to complain, as many riders have — often in angry and colorful language. “Enough with the sick passenger excuse,” she wrote to the authority’s account. “No one buys it!”

Ms. Moy, 25, who lives in Sunset Park in Brooklyn, has noticed more of these delays and wondered whether they were really caused by sick passengers, rather than equipment problems. If more people are falling ill, the authority should have more personnel on hand to help, she said.

“It just doesn’t make sense to delay thousands of people over one sick passenger,” she said in an interview. “There has to be a better way to handle it.”

The response by the authorities depends on the condition of the sick passenger. Workers are instructed not to move riders who cannot walk off the train on their own and to wait for emergency medical workers to assess the patient. If the passenger can step off the train, someone else — a friend, a worker or a police officer — must stay until help arrives. Otherwise, the conductor must stay with the rider, and the train may have to be pulled out of service.

In 2013, Casey Blue James was standing on a crowded train in Queens when she started to feel woozy and fainted. When she awoke, the train was stopped and everyone was staring at her. A transportation authority worker stayed with her at the station until an ambulance arrived to take her to the emergency room.

When Ms. James, 26, who works in publishing and lives in Jackson Heights, Queens, had the same dizzy feeling last year, she shoved her way off the train to avoid embarrassment and fainted on a platform. After being told she had a condition in which her blood pressure can drop rapidly, she now carries water and snacks in her bag.

Before it happened to her, she was annoyed by the delays like everyone else.

“I feel much more sympathetic when I hear that’s the reason now,” she said.

In an ad campaign, the authority has urged riders who feel sick to get off at the next stop to get help — and to alleviate delays. Officials have reminded riders not to pull the emergency brake, which abruptly stops the train, because that can slow the emergency response if the train is stranded between stations.

Starting in the late 1990s, the transportation authority tried to reduce the impact of sick passengers by stationing nurses in a few busy stations. But the program ended around 2008, done in by a budget crunch.

John Rugen, an E.M.T. for the New York Fire Department, has responded to a number of sick riders, including a man who had a seizure this year in Queens. Finding a patient can be challenging, he said, especially at big, busy stations where many lines converge and entry points are spread over a wide area.

Other riders are often impatient, eager to get moving and sometimes oblivious to the condition of the passenger.

“You can’t stop patient care and explain what’s happening,” Mr. Rugen said.

For Gene Russianoff, the longtime leader of the Straphangers Campaign, a rider advocacy group, being a sick passenger taught him that New Yorkers can be remarkably kind. When he once fell forward while on a train and hit the floor, bloodying his nose, people on the train rushed to help.

“It’s the golden rule,” he said. “If you got sick, would you want someone to step over you and say, ‘I’m late to get to Macy’s’?”

n a basement on the Irvine campus of the University of California, behind a series of five protective doors, two teams of biologists have created a novel breed of mosquito that they hope will help eradicate malaria from the world.

FROM OUR ADVERTISERS





The mosquito has been engineered to carry two ingenious genetic modifications. One is a set of genes that spew out antibodies to the malarial parasite harbored by the mosquito. Mosquitoes with these genes are rendered resistant to the parasite and so cannot spread malaria.

The other modification is a set of genetic elements known as a gene drive that should propel the malaria-resistance genes throughout a natural mosquito population. When a malaria-resistant male mosquito mates with a wild female, the gene drive copies both itself and the resistance genes over from the male chromosome to its female counterpart.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Mating moths. Scientists hope to stop using pesticides to fight diamondback moths by genetically engineering them with DNA that kills female larvae.Replacing Pesticides With GeneticsAUG. 31, 2015
A female Aedes aegypti mosquito at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta. Only the females bite, which is how diseases like dengue are transmitted.A Mosquito Solution (More Mosquitoes) Raises Heat in Florida KeysFEB. 19, 2015
Scientists reprogrammed the common bacterium E. coli so it requires a synthetic amino acid to live.Scientists Work to Contain Modified Organisms to Labs JAN. 21, 2015
A child undergoes treatment for malaria in Tripura State in India.Matter: A Call to Fight Malaria One Mosquito at a Time by Altering DNAJULY 17, 2014
Eureka: When Mutant Mosquitoes AttackFEB. 19, 2013
Concerns Raised about Genetically Engineered MosquitoesOCT. 30, 2011
Because almost all the progeny carry the new genes, instead of just 50 percent as would be expected by Mendel’s laws of genetics, the inserted genes are expected to spread rapidly and take over a wild population in as few as 10 generations, or a single season. A large region, at least in principle, could be freed from malaria, which kills almost 600,000 people a year.

The anti-malarial antibody genes were developed by a group led by Anthony A. James of the University of California, Irvine, and the gene drive by Valentino M. Gantz and Ethan Bier of the University of California, San Diego. The two teams reported the result of their collaboration in Monday’s issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

“This is a very important advance in the field of mosquito biology,” said George Dimopoulos, a biologist at Johns Hopkins who has engineered mosquitoes to resist the malarial parasite with a different set of genes.

Op-Ed Contributor: The Risks of Assisting EvolutionNOV. 10, 2015
Kevin Esvelt, an expert on the gene drive technique at Harvard, said he was delighted with the work of the two teams. “We have a wonderful chance of knocking down malaria and dengue fever and other diseases, so hats off to Tony James, who has been developing these techniques for 15 years,” he said.

The two teams came together after Dr. Gantz and Dr. Bier developed a gene drive for the Drosophila fruit fly, a standard laboratory organism, to help identify genetically mutant insects. Finding their gene drive was far more efficient than expected, driving its cargo genes into almost all the fruit fly progeny, the researchers realized they had created not just a handy laboratory tool but a powerful technique for spreading favored genes through wild populations.

After sending a report of their finding to the journal Science, which published it in April, Dr. Bier started looking around for practical uses for the technique, and came across a 2012 article in which Dr. James described making mosquitoes resistant to the malarial parasite. Dr. James concluded his paper by noting that “if coupled with a mechanism for gene spread,” his resistance genes “could become a self-sustaining disease control tool.” Having developed just such a mechanism, Dr. Bier called Dr. James to propose a collaboration.


It took Dr. Valentino about two months to load all the necessary genetic elements onto a plasmid, a viruslike circle of DNA that genetic engineers use to insert genes into chromosomes. Some 680 wild mosquito larvae were injected with the cargo-carrying plasmid. About half grew to adults, which were mated with wild mosquitoes, and the progeny were then screened to see if the injected plasmids had successfully found their way to the eggs or sperm of the original larvae.

To help track the progress of the experiment, Dr. Gantz engineered a color marker into the plasmid’s cargo, a gene that turned the mosquitoes’ eyes red. Thus the appearance of red-eyed mosquitoes would mean the drive and its cargo had successfully been inherited.

Olga Tatarenkova, a member of Dr. James’s team, picked up the task of screening 25,000 mosquito larvae. One Saturday morning in July, she found two larvae with red eyes. After checking with other members to verify her finding, she emailed Dr. James to tell him the good news.

Dr. James, Dr. Gantz and Dr. Bier plan to refine the mosquitoes’ genetics and conduct trials in cages. He hopes that eventually scientists in some country where malaria is endemic will invite them to conduct a field trial and will monitor it carefully to make sure there are no adverse affects, even though it’s hard to see any ecological downside to protecting the mosquitoes against the malarial parasite.

Dr. Dimopoulos, who has engineered mosquitoes to rev up their immune systems and reject the malaria parasite, plans to add a gene drive as Dr. James has done, and to seek the Zambian government’s approval for a trial in a large, greenhouselike enclosure he operates in southern Zambia.

Rendering the wild mosquito population immune to the malaria parasite may seem a fairly minimal and benign intervention. But no gene drives have yet been released into the wild, and biologists are keen to avoid surprises that might arouse public hostility to the novel technology.

A more likely mishap is that the gene drive and its cargo genes will start to develop mutations that impair their inheritance or that natural selection will favor other genes that overwhelm them. The biologists could respond by developing new gene drives and cargoes, but the process could become uneconomical, in which case the new approach would fail or offer just partial advantages.

Dr. James plans to proceed in careful stages with the knowledge and approval of local authorities. “This is the kind of technology where the first trial has to be a success,” he said.

The agricultural revolution was one of the most profound events in human history, leading to the rise of modern civilization. Now, in the first study of its kind, an international team of scientists has found that after agriculture arrived in Europe 8,500 years ago, people’s DNA underwent widespread changes, altering their height, digestion, immune system and skin color.

Researchers had found indirect clues of some of these alterations by studying the genomes of living Europeans. But the new study, they said, makes it possible to see the changes as they occurred over thousands of years.

“For decades we’ve been trying to figure out what happened in the past,” said Rasmus Nielsen, a geneticist at the University of California, Berkeley, who was not involved in the new study. “And now we have a time machine.”

Before the advent of studies of ancient DNA, scientists had relied mainly on bones and other physical remains to understand European history. The earliest bones of modern humans in Europe date to about 45,000 years ago, researchers have found.

Early Europeans lived as hunter-gatherers for over 35,000 years. About 8,500 years ago, farmers left their first mark in the archaeological record of the continent.

By studying living Europeans, scientists had already found evidence suggesting that their ancestors adapted to agriculture through natural selection. As tools to sequence DNA became more readily available, researchers even discovered some of the molecular underpinnings of these traits.

But these studies couldn’t help determine exactly when the changes occurred, or whether they resulted from natural selection or the migrations of people into Europe from other regions.

Scientists are now tackling these questions in a much more direct way, thanks to a rapidly growing supply of DNA from ancient skeletons. These studies have revealed that the DNA of Europeans today comes from three main sources.

Before the rise of agriculture, Europe was home to a population of hunter-gatherers. Then a wave of people arrived whose DNA resembles that of people in the Near East. It’s likely that they brought agriculture with them.

Groundbreaking laws in two Western states will soon make access to birth control easier for millions of women by allowing them to obtain contraceptives from pharmacists without a doctor’s prescription.

FROM OUR ADVERTISERS





Even as the Supreme Court prepares to consider another divisive case involving access to contraception, public health advocates hope these arrangements could spread across the country, as states grappling with persistently high rates of unintended pregnancy seek to increase access to birth control with measures that so far have been unavailable under federal law.

Most Western countries require a doctor’s prescription for hormonal contraceptives like pills, patches and rings, but starting sometime in the next few months, women in California and Oregon will be able to obtain these types of birth control by getting a prescription directly from the pharmacist who dispenses them, a more convenient and potentially less expensive option than going to the doctor.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Among the challengers is an order of nuns based in Baltimore called the Little Sisters of the Poor.Supreme Court to Hear New Case on Contraception and ReligionNOV. 6, 2015
A Study Bolsters a Call to Use Long-Acting Contraceptives OCT. 1, 2014
Pharmacists will be authorized to prescribe contraceptives after a quick screening process in which women fill out a questionnaire about their health and medical histories. The contraceptives will be covered by insurance, as they are now.

Photo

Jill Vincik, a high school teacher who recently moved to Bend, Ore., said being able to get her birth control pills without a doctor’s appointment would make her life easier. Credit Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
The laws are the latest effort to make birth control more accessible, a longstanding goal of medical professionals and policy makers. But unlike other recent debates over contraception — including the firestorm over the Obama administration’s requirement under the Affordable Care Act that all health plans pay for contraceptives — these legislative efforts have been largely free of political rancor.

“I feel strongly that this is what’s best for women’s health in the 21st century, and I also feel it will have repercussions for decreasing poverty because one of the key things for women in poverty is unintended pregnancy,” said State Representative Knute Buehler, a Republican who sponsored Oregon’s law.

About half of the 6.6 million pregnancies annually in the United States are unintended, a higher proportion than in Europe.

Reproductive health groups and medical associations increasingly say the ultimate goal should be to make contraceptives available without a prescription, and some worry that the push for pharmacist-prescribed contraceptives could thwart that. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists is one of the few groups to express opposition to these laws, arguing that hormonal contraceptives should be available solely over the counter.

“My basic tenet is there should be nobody between the patient and the pill,” said Dr. Mark DeFrancesco, the president of the organization. “I’m afraid we’re going to create a new model that becomes a barrier between that and over the counter. I worry that it’s going to derail the over-the-counter movement.”

But supporters of over-the-counter contraceptives acknowledge that getting Food and Drug Administration approval could take a long time because the agency often requires additional studies.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story

Cost is another possible drawback of over-the-counter sales. The Affordable Care Act does not explicitly require plans to cover over-the-counter medications, so women might wind up paying hundreds of dollars a year for over-the-counter birth control instead of obtaining it free with a prescription.

A bill introduced in Congress in May by Republican senators would help expedite the process in which contraceptive manufacturers apply to the Food and Drug Administration for over-the-counter approval, but some Democrats and women’s groups say it might ultimately reduce birth control use because it does not specify insurance coverage for over-the-counter methods. In response, Democrats have introduced a bill stipulating that contraceptives would remain covered if they were to become available without a prescription.

Photo

Most Western countries require a doctor’s prescription for hormonal contraceptives like pills, patches and rings. Credit Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
In the absence of federal action, states are stepping in.

Jill Vincik, a high school teacher who recently moved to Bend, Ore., said that being able to get her birth control pills without a doctor’s appointment would make her life easier.

“I would certainly take advantage of it,” said Ms. Vincik, 37, a single mother, who noted that she had a gynecological exam before moving and had not yet found a gynecologist in Oregon. “I shouldn’t be in a position to have to go to a doctor when my pills run out. I’m not going to do another Pap smear; I just did one.”

Advocates of this approach, including pharmacists’ organizations, plan to lobby for it across the country. “We are actively going to come up with a statute to spread to other states, and I think it can spread pretty quickly,” said Mr. Buehler, the Oregon legislator, who is also an orthopedist. Pharmacy board representatives from states including Arizona and Idaho observed a recent meeting in Oregon about the new rules.

A New Mexico proposal that failed in 2012 is expected to be revised to reflect the Oregon and California measures, said Dale Tinker, the executive director of the New Mexico Pharmacists Association. Raley’s, a grocery store and pharmacy chain with 80 stores in Northern California and 16 in Nevada, is urging Nevada to follow California’s lead, said Lee Worthy, the chain’s vice president for pharmacy and wellness.

“It’s going to take a lot of the barriers away from that underserved community that we see surrounding every store,” Mr. Worthy said.

Many reproductive health experts have come to support pharmacist-prescribed contraceptives, persuaded that pharmacists can safely dispense contraception without a doctor’s prescription and that women can assess their health risks on questionnaires.

“There’s a growing body of evidence that there isn’t a safety concern,” said Dr. Daniel Grossman, vice president for research at Ibis Reproductive Health and a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of California, San Francisco. “There are studies showing that women can really accurately identify the conditions that make it appropriate to use certain contraceptives, using a simple checklist.”

Photo

Stephanie Cavallo, a pharmacist, with a customer at Raley’s in Rohnert Park, Calif. Raley's, a grocery store and pharmacy chain in California and Nevada, is urging Nevada to follow California’s lead. Credit Ramin Rahimian for The New York Times
Advertisement


Some people have argued that a need for contraception brings women to the doctor, ensuring that they get other important screening tests, like Pap smears to detect cervical cancer. But Dr. Nancy Stanwood, an obstetrician and chairwoman of the board of Physicians for Reproductive Health, said a study of Texas women who received over-the-counter contraceptives in Mexico had found that many still visited doctors for Pap smears. And she noted that Pap smears were now recommended every three years, not annually, and not until women turn 21.

“We were holding pregnancy prevention hostage to cancer screening,” Dr. Stanwood said. “They’re both worthwhile goals, but one should not be held hostage to the other.”

The new laws are extensions of arrangements now found in almost every state: collaborative practice laws that allow pharmacists to administer vaccines or prescribe certain medications if they have agreements with physicians or other health providers. The laws vary widely, and some include only specific diseases or drugs. But in some places, like Washington State and Washington, D.C., collaborative practice laws are broad enough for pharmacists to prescribe birth control if their physician agreements permit it.

In Seattle, Beverly Schaefer, a co-owner of Katterman’s Sand Point Pharmacy, has a physician’s permission to prescribe various medications, including antibiotics and antihistamines. She charges a $35 fee, and will prescribe hormonal contraceptives for women who say they have previously been prescribed them.

So far, those customers have typically been college students who “haven’t planned ahead and are like, ‘Oh, my god, I don’t have any contraceptives,’” she said. “I also see it in some ways as being more comfortable for women because it is a less clinical environment.”

But arrangements like this have been sporadic, experts say, because arranging physician agreements can be time-consuming, and women often do not know which pharmacies have them.

One unanswered question, however, is whether insurers will pay for the time pharmacists spend reviewing women’s questionnaires or helping evaluate options. To cover that cost, some pharmacists may charge fees of $25 or more, which could be an obstacle for some women.

The laws in Oregon and California differ in some ways. California’s has no age restriction; the Oregon law requires that teenagers under 18 obtain their first contraceptive prescription from a doctor. In California, pharmacists will also most likely have to take women’s blood pressure for contraceptives containing estrogen.

Dr. Stanwood of Physicians for Reproductive Health described these states as “incubators, which may end up being a model at the national level.”

She said, “We need to think outside of that old-fashioned box that just doesn’t apply to women’s lives now.”

Weather-related disasters in the past two decades have killed more than 600,000 people and inflicted economic losses estimated at trillions of dollars, the United Nations said on Monday, warning that the frequency and impact of such events was set to rise.

The figures were released before a United Nations-backed climate meeting, starting next Monday in Paris, at which more than 120 national leaders will try to rein in greenhouse gas emissions and slow the rise in global temperatures.

According to the report from the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, the United States has suffered the highest number of weather-related disasters in the past two decades, but China and India have been the most severely affected, enduring floods that had an impact on billions of people.

As well as killing hundreds of thousands, weather-related disasters wounded 4.1 billion others and inflicted economic costs well in excess of $1.9 trillion over the two decades, the report found.

“Predictions of more extreme weather in the future almost certainly means that we will witness a continued upward trend in weather-related disasters in the decades ahead,” the report said.

In a foreword to the findings, Margareta Wahlstrom, the head of the disaster reduction office, said the findings “underline why it is so important that a new climate change agreement emerges” from the summit meeting in Paris.

Citing the rising temperature of the oceans and melting glaciers as two central drivers of extreme weather, Ms. Wahlstrom said that agreement on reducing greenhouse gas emissions would help reduce the huge damage and losses inflicted by disasters linked to climate.

The connection between extreme weather and climate change is not always clear. There is strong evidence that the warming climate is creating more frequent and intense heat waves, causing heavier rainstorms, worsening coastal flooding and intensifying some droughts, but for many other types of weather occurrences, the linkage is less clear.

Floods accounted for close to half of all the weather-related disasters, affecting 2.3 billion people, mostly in Asia, the report found. Storms had taken the heaviest toll of lives, however, causing about 242,000 recorded deaths, including 138,000 killed by Cyclone Nargis, which struck Myanmar in 2008.

Droughts, most acute in Africa, had affected more than a billion people in the past two decades, leading not only to hunger, malnutrition and disease but also to widespread agricultural failure that resulted in long-lasting underdevelopment, the report said.

Heat waves had killed 148,000, mostly in Europe, and wildfires had emerged as another climate-related risk, according to the report. About 38 major wildfires in the United States were estimated to have affected more than 108,000 people and caused recorded losses of over $11 billion — numbers the report said were sure to rise when fires that were raging after August 2015, the cutoff point for data, were taken into account.

The figure of $1.9 trillion for the worldwide cost of the disasters was drawn up for the United Nations by the Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, based in Belgium. The center said that figure was a minimum, however, as data was available for only a little more than a third of the recorded disasters.

The N.F.L. has often trumpeted its increased efforts to spot and treat concussions, including allowing a medical spotter to call a timeout this season if a potential injury is missed by on-field staff.

But the concussion sustained by St. Louis Rams quarterback Case Keenum on Sunday has fans wondering whether the league’s system is working as designed.

With just over a minute remaining in regulation time and the score tied, 13-13, against the Baltimore Ravens, Keenum dropped back to pass and was thrown to the ground after releasing the ball. The back of Keenum’s head slammed against the turf. He immediately put both of his hands on his helmet. Then he tried to get up, wobbled and fell back down. Clearly dazed, Keenum was helped to his feet by a teammate.

The Rams sent their trainer onto the field to look at Keenum, who stayed in the game. Two plays later, Keenum was sacked, and fumbled. The Ravens then moved downfield and kicked a winning field goal.


Arizona Cardinals running back David Johnson outran Bengals linebacker Vontaze Burfict for a touchdown in the second half.N.F.L. Week 11 Scores and Highlights
The Bengals walk off the field in dismay after losing to the Cardinals, 34-31, on Sunday night.Cardinals and Bengals Discover the Benefits of Being DisconcertedNOV. 23, 2015
An average pass by Alex Smith, No. 11, has traveled just 6.08 yards from the line of scrimmage, by far the fewest in the league.After a Horrid Start, the Chiefs Are Making a Playoff RunNOV. 23, 2015
Only after the game did the Rams give Keenum a test to see if he sustained a concussion, which he did. The Rams did not explain why he was not taken out of the game. Coach Jeff Fisher was not asked about the hit in his postgame news conference, though he essentially said the team’s offensive line played poorly.

Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.


Continue reading the main story
Fisher said he expected Keenum to play on Sunday, but that was before he learned that his quarterback had been concussed.

Fisher will speak to the news media on Monday at 5 p.m. Central time.

Brian McCarthy, an N.F.L. spokesman, said in a statement that immediately after the game, the league began a review to determine why Keenum “was not removed from the game for the necessary evaluation by a team physician or unaffiliated neuro-trauma consultant as required by our concussion protocols.”

League officials are talking to the Rams and their medical staff, the spotter at the game, the referees, N.F.L. medical advisers and the players’ union.

“In the meantime, prior to this week’s games, we will reinforce with all involved the need to ensure that these injuries are properly identified and addressed in a manner consistent with our protocols,” the league said.

McCarthy said a league spotter can ask for a timeout to be called when a trainer has not come onto the field. In this case, the Rams sent their trainer out to look at Keenum. Why he was left in the game is a question yet to be answered.

Fans and sports commenters seemed to have made up their minds. Bernie Miklasz, a longtime St. Louis sportswriter and radio host, spoke for many of the hundreds of commenters online when he called the oversight “disgraceful.”

“This wasn’t a case of a player being able to cover up his injury — hoping no one witnessed it — so he could stay in the game,” he wrote. “This still happens too often in the N.F.L., even after the league’s initiative to be on full alert to look for signs of a concussion.”

The hit to Keenum comes less than two weeks after the Rams signed wide receiver Wes Welker, who has suffered several documented concussions in his 12-year career, including three in a nine-month period. Fisher said he had no concerns about Welker’s condition, and Welker, 34, brushed off skeptics.

“I’m really now worried about it,” he said, adding that he played last season without suffering a head injury. “I know I’m a poster child right now and everything else. I’m good and ready to play some ball.”

Groundbreaking laws in two Western states will soon make access to birth control easier for millions of women by allowing them to obtain contraceptives from pharmacists without a doctor’s prescription.

FROM OUR ADVERTISERS





Even as the Supreme Court prepares to consider another divisive case involving access to contraception, public health advocates hope these arrangements could spread across the country, as states grappling with persistently high rates of unintended pregnancy seek to increase access to birth control with measures that so far have been unavailable under federal law.

Most Western countries require a doctor’s prescription for hormonal contraceptives like pills, patches and rings, but starting sometime in the next few months, women in California and Oregon will be able to obtain these types of birth control by getting a prescription directly from the pharmacist who dispenses them, a more convenient and potentially less expensive option than going to the doctor.

Among the challengers is an order of nuns based in Baltimore called the Little Sisters of the Poor.Supreme Court to Hear New Case on Contraception and ReligionNOV. 6, 2015
A Study Bolsters a Call to Use Long-Acting Contraceptives OCT. 1, 2014
Pharmacists will be authorized to prescribe contraceptives after a quick screening process in which women fill out a questionnaire about their health and medical histories. The contraceptives will be covered by insurance, as they are now.

Jill Vincik, a high school teacher who recently moved to Bend, Ore., said being able to get her birth control pills without a doctor’s appointment would make her life easier. Credit Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
The laws are the latest effort to make birth control more accessible, a longstanding goal of medical professionals and policy makers. But unlike other recent debates over contraception — including the firestorm over the Obama administration’s requirement under the Affordable Care Act that all health plans pay for contraceptives — these legislative efforts have been largely free of political rancor.

“I feel strongly that this is what’s best for women’s health in the 21st century, and I also feel it will have repercussions for decreasing poverty because one of the key things for women in poverty is unintended pregnancy,” said State Representative Knute Buehler, a Republican who sponsored Oregon’s law.

About half of the 6.6 million pregnancies annually in the United States are unintended, a higher proportion than in Europe.

Reproductive health groups and medical associations increasingly say the ultimate goal should be to make contraceptives available without a prescription, and some worry that the push for pharmacist-prescribed contraceptives could thwart that. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists is one of the few groups to express opposition to these laws, arguing that hormonal contraceptives should be available solely over the counter.

“My basic tenet is there should be nobody between the patient and the pill,” said Dr. Mark DeFrancesco, the president of the organization. “I’m afraid we’re going to create a new model that becomes a barrier between that and over the counter. I worry that it’s going to derail the over-the-counter movement.”

But supporters of over-the-counter contraceptives acknowledge that getting Food and Drug Administration approval could take a long time because the agency often requires additional studies.

Cost is another possible drawback of over-the-counter sales. The Affordable Care Act does not explicitly require plans to cover over-the-counter medications, so women might wind up paying hundreds of dollars a year for over-the-counter birth control instead of obtaining it free with a prescription.

A bill introduced in Congress in May by Republican senators would help expedite the process in which contraceptive manufacturers apply to the Food and Drug Administration for over-the-counter approval, but some Democrats and women’s groups say it might ultimately reduce birth control use because it does not specify insurance coverage for over-the-counter methods. In response, Democrats have introduced a bill stipulating that contraceptives would remain covered if they were to become available without a prescription.


Most Western countries require a doctor’s prescription for hormonal contraceptives like pills, patches and rings. Credit Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
In the absence of federal action, states are stepping in.

Jill Vincik, a high school teacher who recently moved to Bend, Ore., said that being able to get her birth control pills without a doctor’s appointment would make her life easier.

“I would certainly take advantage of it,” said Ms. Vincik, 37, a single mother, who noted that she had a gynecological exam before moving and had not yet found a gynecologist in Oregon. “I shouldn’t be in a position to have to go to a doctor when my pills run out. I’m not going to do another Pap smear; I just did one.”

Advocates of this approach, including pharmacists’ organizations, plan to lobby for it across the country. “We are actively going to come up with a statute to spread to other states, and I think it can spread pretty quickly,” said Mr. Buehler, the Oregon legislator, who is also an orthopedist. Pharmacy board representatives from states including Arizona and Idaho observed a recent meeting in Oregon about the new rules.

A New Mexico proposal that failed in 2012 is expected to be revised to reflect the Oregon and California measures, said Dale Tinker, the executive director of the New Mexico Pharmacists Association. Raley’s, a grocery store and pharmacy chain with 80 stores in Northern California and 16 in Nevada, is urging Nevada to follow California’s lead, said Lee Worthy, the chain’s vice president for pharmacy and wellness.

“It’s going to take a lot of the barriers away from that underserved community that we see surrounding every store,” Mr. Worthy said.

Many reproductive health experts have come to support pharmacist-prescribed contraceptives, persuaded that pharmacists can safely dispense contraception without a doctor’s prescription and that women can assess their health risks on questionnaires.

“There’s a growing body of evidence that there isn’t a safety concern,” said Dr. Daniel Grossman, vice president for research at Ibis Reproductive Health and a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of California, San Francisco. “There are studies showing that women can really accurately identify the conditions that make it appropriate to use certain contraceptives, using a simple checklist.”

Stephanie Cavallo, a pharmacist, with a customer at Raley’s in Rohnert Park, Calif. Raley's, a grocery store and pharmacy chain in California and Nevada, is urging Nevada to follow California’s lead. Credit Ramin Rahimian for The New York Times
Advertisement


Continue reading the main story
Some people have argued that a need for contraception brings women to the doctor, ensuring that they get other important screening tests, like Pap smears to detect cervical cancer. But Dr. Nancy Stanwood, an obstetrician and chairwoman of the board of Physicians for Reproductive Health, said a study of Texas women who received over-the-counter contraceptives in Mexico had found that many still visited doctors for Pap smears. And she noted that Pap smears were now recommended every three years, not annually, and not until women turn 21.

“We were holding pregnancy prevention hostage to cancer screening,” Dr. Stanwood said. “They’re both worthwhile goals, but one should not be held hostage to the other.”

The new laws are extensions of arrangements now found in almost every state: collaborative practice laws that allow pharmacists to administer vaccines or prescribe certain medications if they have agreements with physicians or other health providers. The laws vary widely, and some include only specific diseases or drugs. But in some places, like Washington State and Washington, D.C., collaborative practice laws are broad enough for pharmacists to prescribe birth control if their physician agreements permit it.

In Seattle, Beverly Schaefer, a co-owner of Katterman’s Sand Point Pharmacy, has a physician’s permission to prescribe various medications, including antibiotics and antihistamines. She charges a $35 fee, and will prescribe hormonal contraceptives for women who say they have previously been prescribed them.

So far, those customers have typically been college students who “haven’t planned ahead and are like, ‘Oh, my god, I don’t have any contraceptives,’” she said. “I also see it in some ways as being more comfortable for women because it is a less clinical environment.”

But arrangements like this have been sporadic, experts say, because arranging physician agreements can be time-consuming, and women often do not know which pharmacies have them.

One unanswered question, however, is whether insurers will pay for the time pharmacists spend reviewing women’s questionnaires or helping evaluate options. To cover that cost, some pharmacists may charge fees of $25 or more, which could be an obstacle for some women.


The laws in Oregon and California differ in some ways. California’s has no age restriction; the Oregon law requires that teenagers under 18 obtain their first contraceptive prescription from a doctor. In California, pharmacists will also most likely have to take women’s blood pressure for contraceptives containing estrogen.

Dr. Stanwood of Physicians for Reproductive Health described these states as “incubators, which may end up being a model at the national level.”

She said, “We need to think outside of that old-fashioned box that just doesn’t apply to women’s lives now.”

When he was not in the operating room at Johns Hopkins Hospital, performing one of his 400 surgeries a year, Dr. Ben Carson could often be seen walking slowly through the hallways, hands behind his back, nodding, smiling and speaking softly to co-workers and students who approached.

FROM OUR ADVERTISERS





“When he walked around Hopkins,” said Dr. Anthony Avellino, a former colleague, “he was like God.”

Patients and nurses asked him to sign his books. Medical students flocked to his occasional lectures or a campus showing of the TV movie version of “Gifted Hands,” Dr. Carson’s memoir.

One student, Dr. Jonathan Dudley, recalled that “Some of my friends had a big poster of him up in their dorm room.”

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Ben Carson before speaking at the University of South Alabama on Thursday.From Vaccines to Creationism, Ben Carson’s Views Perplex SomeNOV. 22, 2015
Ben Carson after a news conference in Henderson, Nev., on Monday.Ben Carson Is Struggling to Grasp Foreign Policy, Advisers SayNOV. 17, 2015
Ben Carson, who recently surged to first place in some national polls, is eyeing voters who are traditionally scarce in Republican primaries: African-Americans.Ben Carson Appeals to Black Voters, but His Campaign Doesn’t, Yet NOV. 5, 2015
Dr. Benjamin S. Carson at his Baltimore office in 2013. Dr. Carson testified as an expert witness in 2000, commenting on the actions of the paramedics who treated Mr. Muhammad in 1997.Before the Stump, Ben Carson Took the Stand as an Expert WitnessNOV. 2, 2015
Supporters at Ben Carson’s book tour bus in Ames, Iowa.Calm Manner Has Ben Carson Rising in PollsOCT. 25, 2015
It seemed fitting, then, that in 2013, Dr. Carson, who was retiring as chief of pediatric neurosurgery, was chosen to give the commencement address for Dr. Dudley’s class. But that March, during a Fox News interview, Dr. Carson appeared to liken same-sex marriage proponents to pedophiles and “people who believe in bestiality.”

Continue reading the main story
From Vaccines to Creationism, Ben Carson’s Views Perplex Some
Ben Carson answered questions on a variety of topics, including vaccines, creationism and his decision to run for president.

For many at Hopkins, it was the first time the ideology of Ben Carson the aspiring politician collided so publicly with the image of Ben Carson the doctor. It spurred calls to remove him as speaker, with many students concerned he would use their graduation to make political statements.

The controversy reflected an apparent paradox about Dr. Carson that has emerged as he campaigns for president.

As a surgeon, he was praised for his dedication, unassuming demeanor and attention to detail. As a candidate, he has sometimes seemed imprecise or ill informed, as when he said China had intervened in Syria, and prone to odd assertions like his belief that Joseph built the pyramids to store grain. Some articles have questioned the accuracy of parts of “Gifted Hands.” His comments doubting evolution and the medically recommended schedule of vaccines have baffled people in science and medicine.

“I think many of the doctors out there would disagree with the things he says as a politician, but understand him as a person as a very decent person,” said Dr. Karin Muraszko, the chairwoman of the neurosurgery department at the University of Michigan, who has socialized and shared patients with Dr. Carson. “The person and the doctor are very separate from the politician.”

Dr. Carson has never held government office, an outsider status that has helped him lead some national polls. It also leaves his medical career and his political views as the closest thing to a record that he can run on.

In interviews, former students and colleagues from Johns Hopkins, where Dr. Carson spent 36 years, said he worked long shifts and took on-call surgical rotations long after someone with his seniority was required to. He was known not for barking orders but for listening to classical music in the operating room, using coat hangers to get the radio reception just right and quizzing surgical team members — could they name this composer, that concerto? Later in his career, he would question them on world history.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
He operated on patients whom surgeons elsewhere had deemed too risky. He led large teams on complex operations. And wanting to know if his approaches were successful, he followed up with patients years later.

He frequently performed more surgeries each year than other neurosurgeons would typically do. His outcomes were largely good, though in the complicated operations that brought him greatest fame, separations of twins joined at the head, results were mixed. In only one of five cases did both twins survive without neurological problems.

Photo
Dr. Ben Carson, right, performing surgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital. He would operate on patients whom surgeons at other hospitals had deemed too risky. Credit Keith Weller/via Johns Hopkins Medicine
Dr. Carson moved easily between the medical and public spheres. Edward McKay Jr., a surgical technician, recalled one evening when Dr. Carson calmly removed a bullet from a 3-year-old’s brain, mentioning in the operating room that after the surgery, “he had to get to the mayor’s house.”

At work, he rarely discussed politics. But in 2013, as graduation approached, students began worrying that the Dr. Carson they knew would be eclipsed by the Dr. Carson the country was beginning to see. Dr. Dudley, who was raised as a conservative evangelical Christian and was inspired by reading “Gifted Hands” as a boy, but whose views later changed, led a petition drive asking Hopkins to remove Dr. Carson as commencement speaker.

After many students expressed similar feelings at a meeting with school officials, Dr. Carson withdrew from giving the address, which would have been a valedictory of his career.

He apologized that his words caused pain, but also wrote of his “hope and prayer that the emphasis on political correctness will decrease.”

Dr. Henry Brem, the chief of neurosurgery at Hopkins and a longtime friend of Dr. Carson’s, said his same-sex marriage comments were “very hurtful to people who were very close to Ben and to me.”

“He says what he thinks,” Dr. Brem said. “He clearly doesn’t get a preapproved consensus.”

“Medically he was that way, too,” Dr. Brem added. “He didn’t worry that other neurosurgeons said, ‘You can’t do this.’ He wasn’t worried that other people weren’t doing it, because he felt the way he sees the world he was generally right and there were good outcomes from it.”

‘People Will Be Amazed’

Photo

Dr. Carson, who was the director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Children's Center in Baltimore, talked about surgery to separate Ladan and Laleh Bijani, 29-year-old conjoined twins from Iran, in 2003. Dr. Carson was part of the team that traveled to Singapore to perform the surgery. Credit Gail Burton/Associated Press
In 1985, a year after being named the nation’s youngest chief of pediatric neurosurgery at 33, Dr. Carson removed half of the brain of Maranda Francisco, a 4-year-old girl with severe epilepsy, reviving the hemispherectomy, an operation that had hardly been performed for years because many patients had serious post-surgical problems. She experienced minimal difficulties afterward.

In 1986, Dr. Carson successfully inserted an intrauterine shunt to drain fluid from the brain of a fetus with hydrocephalus.

He received attention for both procedures, and even then was aware of fame’s potential role in his life.

In an interview this month, Dr. Carson said that in 1987, when he was about to lead a team to separate German twins joined at the back of the head, he told his wife that he had already received “two 15 minutes of fame.”

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
“If there’s another one, it is probably going to change our lives,” he said he told her, “because, I said, the media isn’t completely stupid. They’ll say, wait a minute, isn’t that the same guy who did that? And the same guy who did that? And then they’ll start looking into my background and people will be amazed and all kinds of things will begin to happen. And of course, that’s exactly what they have done.”

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
Dr. Muraszko said that while the 1987 operation was the first with children joined at that particular brain location, it “got blown a little out of proportion.”

“There have been many people before and since Ben who have taken apart children who are joined at the head,” she said.

She said the hospital had most likely generated that publicity. “I’m not sure Ben had much to do with advertising that,” she said, although “I think he knows how to artfully use that in a conversation.”

Photo

Dr. Carson with Carol James, his longtime physician assistant. Credit Via the Ben Carson campaign
He slid easily into the role of famous surgeon, colleagues said.

“The nurses would be like, ‘Oh, there he is,’ ” Dr. Avellino, now the chief executive officer of the Illinois Neurological Institute, recalled with amusement. “I’d be like, ‘Wow, what am I? I’m Tony, Tony Avellino, right here.’ ”

Before he became so famous, though, Dr. Carson was occasionally mistaken for an orderly and received chilly receptions from some patients who had not encountered an African-American doctor, he has written.

Carol James, his longtime physician assistant, recalled meeting with parents who used “extremely biased” language in speaking of black people. “I simply stopped and said, ‘Do you understand that Dr. Carson is black?’ ”

They agreed to let him treat their child. “I think they ultimately were very embarrassed,” Ms. James said, “and had gone and spoken with other people who knew who he was.”

Prayers and Bank Shots

Before entering the operating room, Dr. Carson had some rituals. He often prayed in the induction room, where anesthesia is administered, sometimes with patients’ parents who knew of his faith and asked to pray with him.

When scrubbing in, he took surgical glove wrappers or towels and shot them like basketballs into the trash. If he made the shot, Mr. McKay said, Dr. Carson would exclaim: “When you’re hot, you’re hot.”

Photo

A portrait in Dr. Carson's home in Maryland depicts him with Jesus. Credit Mark Makela
Dr. George Jallo, a pediatric neurosurgeon whom Dr. Carson recruited, recalled that a nurse once blocked the shot, calling out, “Not today, Carson.”

But, said Dr. Jallo, “You couldn’t do any off-color or inappropriate jokes; he’s a very religious man.”

Ms. James said humor had to be “squeaky clean.” He would occasionally tell jokes, “like, ‘What did a duck say?’ ” she said. “They were things that a 6-year-old would say. He would tell them, and they’d be so corny you’d just want to groan.”

At the hospital, Dr. Carson expressed his faith subtly, as when he read proverbs in his office each morning. At home, religious trappings were more overt, including a quote from Proverbs inscribed in gold on a marble wall and a painting of Dr. Carson in a lab coat next to Jesus, who has his arm on Dr. Carson’s shoulder.

Ms. James said, “If something was going wrong or it wasn’t going to come out the way he thought,” he sometimes stopped the procedure, “feeling something from a higher power that was causing him to say, ‘We can always do that another day.’ ”

Dr. Muraszko at the University of Michigan said most pediatric neurosurgeons consider 250 operations a year a number that can be handled well. For years, Dr. Carson performed up to 400, partly because his fame made him sought-after. Indeed, Dr. Muraszko said she sent him patients wanting second opinions, telling them, “I’m going to send you to a famous neurosurgeon.”

“Pretty much everything that came through the door, I did,” Dr. Carson said in the recent interview. “I was just operating day and night.”

On weekends, Dr. Carson often traveled to give motivational speeches. “We would know about it, not because he talked about it, but because we covered for him,” Dr. Brem said. “People were working very hard to take care of his patients until he got back.”


"He says what he thinks," Dr. Henry Brem, the chief of neurosurgery at Hopkins, said of Dr. Carson, a longtime friend. Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times
(In one book, “Think Big, Unleashing Your Potential for Excellence,” Dr. Carson wrote that he heard some colleagues had said “unkind and harsh words” about him, which he ascribed to “professional jealousy.”)

Dr. Brem said that as a surgeon, Dr. Carson “did have a profound sense of confidence,” operating on some “children who other people felt surgery wasn’t an answer for.”

Still, Dr. Muraszko said his operations were “pretty mainstream,” with one exception: “In epilepsy I would say he’s been fairly aggressive.”

When Dr. Carson and a Hopkins neurologist, Dr. John Freeman, began resurrecting the hemispherectomy to treat severe epilepsy, “it was controversial,” said Michael Guarnieri, former pediatric neurosurgery research director at Hopkins.

But Dr. Carson and colleagues capitalized on medical advances that lessened past problems like postoperative bleeding and infections. That lowered the physical risk, while stopping seizures by removing the damaged half of the brain. In many patients, the remaining half largely compensated for functions like language, so while most children still had cognitive and developmental problems, surgery usually did not worsen those.

“The experience certainly validated the approach that he had elected to take, and it encouraged other people to resurrect the surgery,” Dr. Guarnieri said.

Benefits of separating twins joined at the head were less conclusive. The 1987 twins, Patrick and Benjamin Binder, experienced serious neurological difficulties.

Twins separated in South Africa in 1997, Luka and Joseph Banda, are neurologically normal. In two other cases, both twins died after separation.


Dr. Jonathan Dudley was a medical student at Johns Hopkins who led a petition drive asking the school to remove Dr. Carson as commencement speaker in 2013. Credit Jim Wilson/The New York Times
In 2004, Dr. Carson led a 100-member team separating Lea and Tabea Block, 10-month-old German babies whose brains shared blood vessel networks.

Previous separations taught Dr. Carson that “eventually the surgeons fell apart because of exhaustion,” Dr. Brem said. So one of his rules was that each surgeon rotate out after four hours, although normally, “we never leave an operation in the middle,” Dr. Brem said.

The operation stretched over five days. Ultimately, one twin, Tabea, began failing. The team tried resuscitating her for an hour, and was ready to quit, but Dr. Carson wanted them to keep trying. He and other team members were in tears. The twins’ mother, Nelly Block, recalled an “extremely emotional” Dr. Carson, exhausted and crestfallen, emerging from the operating room with Tabea’s lifeless body.

“He was obviously very disappointed that they could not revive her,” she said in a phone interview from her home in Lemgo, Germany. Lea, now 12, is legally blind and struggles with walking, but her mother said she speaks well and that over all they are “extremely pleased” with Lea’s progress.

The Candidate Emerges

Dr. Carson was aware of reports that neurosurgeons, working long stressful hours, “tended to drop dead early,” said Ms. James, and Dr. Carson, now 64, who survived prostate cancer in 2002, “for years talked about the fact that he did not expect to live to be 60.”

Around that time, he became a grandfather and began devouring books on American history. “He started getting more and more vocal about politics and who was doing what and more importantly who wasn’t doing what,” Ms. James said.

In medicine, when senior physicians quiz other staff members, it is called pimping. With Dr. Carson, “more and more instead of getting pimped on classical music, we’d get pimped on government,” Ms. James said.



While he served on President George W. Bush’s Council on Bioethics, he rejected proposals from Maryland Republicans that he run for office, like lieutenant governor or United States senator.

That changed after he spoke at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast, castigating what he called “political correctness” as “a horrible thing” in a speech some found insulting to President Obama, who attended.

After that, Dr. Carson said in the recent interview, “the Draft Ben movement started, and pretty soon I was getting thousands of petitions every week from around the country.”

Friends and colleagues have watched intently, generally feeling protective of him and explaining some startling statements as the words of a novice candidate caught in unforgiving media headlights.

One instance, however, has troubled his medical friends. In one Republican debate, Dr. Carson responded to a question about vaccines by noting that there was “no autism associated with vaccination,” but adding, “However, it is true that we are probably giving way too many in far too short a time.”

He also said that while vaccines that “prevent death or crippling” are important, “there are a multitude of vaccines which probably don’t fit in that category, and there should be some discretion in those cases.”

Vaccines prevent potentially lethal disease, and medical consensus strongly supports current vaccine timing and dosage. Ms. James said that when she heard Dr. Carson’s comments, “I was ranting and raving.” She said she later decided it might reflect another quality: “how he is open to compromise.”

Ms. James was personally affected by fallout from Dr. Carson’s public comments in 2013. Besides withdrawing as commencement speaker, he and Ms. James were asked to withdraw from accepting an award together from the American Academy of Physician Assistants. Reluctantly, they obliged.

“It certainly wasn’t the way that we wanted to end a very long career at Hopkins,” she said.

Months after Dr. Carson retired, a Hopkins party was held, kept off limits to the media. “We didn’t want this to be turned into a political thing,” Dr. Brem said. “We wanted this to be about Ben Carson — our Ben Carson.”

MIAMI — “Everybody’s always looking for the next art neighborhood,” mused Tony Cho, standing amid the scrum outside Gallery Diet. Taking in the scene at its opening night party here, he motioned to another new gallery across the street, its neon sign punctuating an otherwise darkened stretch of this city’s Little Haiti neighborhood. “It’s going to happen here.”

FROM OUR ADVERTISERS





All the key art world participants were present: affluent collectors, museum curators, local artists and not least, investors like Mr. Cho, chief executive of Metro 1 Properties in Miami and a figure associated with the art-linked real estate surge in the once-industrial Wynwood neighborhood, 30 blocks south.

Signs of Little Haiti’s impending transformation are everywhere. Gallery Diet is one of nearly a dozen art galleries that have relocated from Wynwood to Little Haiti and its adjoining Little River area, including the Michael Jon Gallery (one of only two Miami dealers selected for the annual Art Basel Miami Beach fair in December), as well as the local stalwarts Emerson Dorsch, Pan American Art Projects and Spinello Projects. Some of Miami’s best-known artists have already made the same move, seeking affordable studios, homes or both. Adding a further social element, Wynwood coffeehouse, bar and restaurant owners are also preparing to open spaces in the predominantly working-class Little Haiti.

Continue reading the main story

FLORIDA
95
 
BISCAYNE BLVD.
NE. 71ST ST.
“Little Haiti”
195
WYNWOOD
Miami
1
2 MILES
By The New York Times
There is a novel twist to this exodus from Wynwood, however. Many art world denizens are buying their buildings instead of renting them, despite the attraction of Little Haiti and Little River rents that top out at $15 a square foot. Artists and gallery owners are drawing on the painful lessons of the past decade’s explosive growth, when many were priced out of the once-cheap industrial zones in Wynwood that had been the area art scene’s center.

The game-changing nature of this shift — a break from the traditional rootlessness of the bohemian art class — is not lost on Nina Johnson-Milewski, director of Gallery Diet. When Mr. Cho warmly clasped her shoulder and teased: “Congratulations! You’re a developer now,” Ms. Johnson-Milewski looked slightly taken aback. She wryly corrected him: “I’m a micro-developer.”

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
Labels aside, Ms. Johnson-Milewski said she realized what’s truly at stake: control. “It’s not just about avoiding having your rent jacked up,” she explained. “Ownership symbolizes independence, and for those of us who produce culture, longevity.”

Longevity can be a novel concept in a city like Miami. The 2002 arrival of Art Basel Miami Beach transformed the area, once derided as a cultural backwater, into a feverishly developing destination for art. Scores of galleries sprang to life in Wynwood, helping to create an American art mecca, behind only Los Angeles and New York.


Nina Johnson-Milewski, director of Gallery Diet, which recently moved from the Wynwood neighborhood of Miami to the Little Haiti neighborhood. Credit Ryan Stone for The New York Times
Wynwood pioneers moved into a down-on-its-heels warehouse district and invested their sweat equity, only to find themselves priced out of the neighborhood they helped make so attractive. Wynwood rents fetch upward of $60 a square foot, triple that of just four years ago; spacious warehouses can command $100,000 rental fees during Art Basel for corporate product introductions and media events. Art may remain part of the marketing of Wynwood, used to sell everything from cocktails to condos. But almost all the galleries that put it on the cultural map are gone.


Buying property in a new neighborhood instead of renting may not exactly smack of storming the barricades, but it is increasingly deemed the only way for art workers to break a vicious cycle of art-powered gentrification.

“When our openings started filling with 17-year-olds looking to get drunk, I knew it meant collectors weren’t going to come to Wynwood anymore,” said Karla Ferguson, director of the Yeelen Gallery.

A move to Little Haiti beckoned as her husband, Jerome Soimaud, already spent his days painting finely detailed portraits of the area’s residents. Among the few who owned their Wynwood galleries, the couple said they sold their property for $323,000 and went from 1,100 square feet to 13,000 square feet.


An installation at the Yeelen Gallery. Credit Ryan Stone for The New York Times
Emerson Dorsch was another of the rare winners in Wynwood who bought its building — a onetime crack house purchased for $120,000 and turned into a vital focal point for emerging talent. This year, the gallery’s directors, Brook Dorsch and Tyler Emerson-Dorsch, his wife, sold their nearly 13,000-square-foot property for $3.05 million, with talk of a Manhattan restaurateur moving in. They promptly sank a good chunk of their windfall into a new Little Haiti space set to open next spring.

“Little Haiti makes me hopeful that there’s still a few places where small-business owners can exist,” Ms. Emerson-Dorsch said.

Little Haiti is hardly an empty vessel awaiting Wynwood’s refugees. Although Haitians are no long the predominant residents of Little Haiti, as they were during the 1980s when thousands fled the notorious Jean-Claude Duvalier regime, the neighborhood retains a strong emotional hold among the island’s diaspora in South Florida. Religious festivals and Haitian roots music concerts draw hundreds from all across Miami. Yet akin to the recent efforts of New York developers to rechristen part of the often-stigmatized South Bronx as the more market-friendly “piano district,” several of Little Haiti’s larger real estate players are adamantly referring to their holdings as part of Little River, or as Lemon City, the area’s largely forgotten name dating to the late-19th century.

Carl Juste, a founder of the Iris PhotoCollective, in Little Haiti, and a Pulitzer Prize-winning photographer for The Miami Herald, finds the renaming ludicrous. “If you walk down Northeast Second Avenue,” he said, referring to the neighborhood’s main commercial strip, “you can hear Haitian music and smell griot,” a signature Haitian pork dish. “When was the last time you walked down Northeast Second Avenue and saw someone trying to sell you lemons?”


An outdoor space showcases artwork at Gallery Diet in Miami, which recently moved to the Little Haiti neighborhood. Credit Ryan Stone for The New York Times
For the painter Edouard Duval-Carrié, who bought a home and studio in Little Haiti, the key to both the survival of a vibrant Haitian culture and a healthy local art scene remains property ownership. Mr. Duval-Carrié ticked off a dozen nearby studio inhabitants originally from Argentina and Colombia right alongside those from Port-au-Prince. But he worries that too many are still renters and easily pushed out. With speculators snapping up prime parcels, he wonders, is it already too late for a critical mass of property-owning artists to cement themselves into Little Haiti?


To that end, Mr. Duval-Carrié hopes the nonprofit ArtCenter South Florida, which runs a complex of subsidized artist studios on Miami Beach — and where he first landed upon arriving in Miami in 1992 — will relocate to Little Haiti, acting as a tipping point to guarantee that artists permanently remain part of the neighborhood fabric.

ArtCenter bought one of its properties in 1988 for $684,000 and recently sold it for $88 million, giving it the comfort of an endowment larger than any other museum or visual arts organization in South Florida. It has opened a temporary exhibition space in Little River, but board members are split. One camp seeks to buy a new building in the Little Haiti area and repeat its model of providing artists with affordable studios, perhaps adding a residential component. The other faction is mulling breaking with its ownership ethos, instead managing a studio complex that the developer Moishe Mana is building in Wynwood, part of a project stretching across 24 acres and including shops and luxury condo towers.

It is a case of more money, more problems, said ArtCenter’s executive director María del Valle. “We need to do this right,” she said. “I’m not going to allow someone to make a return of 200 percent in one year off of the ArtCenter.”

Ms. del Valle has hopes that the constant jockeying between real estate agents and artists in Miami will work in art’s favor.

“I wish we could spend less time thinking about real estate,” she said with a sigh, “and more time thinking about art.”

Passing on experience from one generation to another, not just by formal teaching but through mentoring and coaching, is crucial to endeavors as unalike as medicine and baseball, and certainly to classical music. There are some things about this art that can only be learned by decades of doing it.

You could see this tradition in action in two quite different performances on Sunday. The New York Youth Symphony opened its 53rd season with a concert at Carnegie Hall conducted by Joshua Gersen, the ensemble’s energetic music director. The program offered inspiring performances of works by Richard Strauss, Ravel and Gershwin, and the premiere of Gabriella Smith’s “Lost Coast.” As usual, the unseen heroes of the concert were the teachers who work individually with these dedicated students.

A few hours later, at Alice Tully Hall, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center offered “Nights in Vienna,” a program with a roster of performers that included the veteran pianist Gilbert Kalish. In a way, Mr. Kalish was just one player among others in performances of works by Haydn, Schoenberg and Brahms. Still, Mr. Kalish, 80, who has been an important teacher for decades, was the featured artist. His colleagues on this occasion included some outstanding younger musicians, like the cellist Nicholas Canellakis and the violinist Kristin Lee.

The Youth Symphony gave a confident and colorful account of Strauss’s tone poem “Till Eulenspiegel’s Merry Pranks,” and brought sensitivity to Ravel’s “Mother Goose” Suite and feistiness to Gershwin’s “An American in Paris.” Ms. Smith’s “Lost Coast,” commissioned through the orchestra’s First Music program, is a 20-minute work featuring solo cello (here, the accomplished Gabriel Cabezas), inspired by a five-day backpacking trip the composer took on the remote Lost Coast Trail in Northern California.

The score is like a landscape in sound, unfolding in a shimmering haze with earthy string sounds, flecks of woodwinds, swelling brass bursts and thematic fragments that never quite coalesce into themes. The solo cello has long, demanding stretches of scratching sounds, slides and rhythmic bursts hand-tapped on the body of the instrument, and Mr. Cabezas dispatched his part vividly. But for all the captivating orchestral effects and colors, the piece seemed a little thin on first hearing.

Later at Tully Hall, the “Nights in Vienna” program opened with a refined, elegant performance of Haydn’s Trio in E minor (Hob. XV12), played by Mr. Kalish, the violinist Nicolas Dautricourt and the cellist Torleif Thedeen. These artists, joined by the violist Paul Neubauer, also offered Brahms’s Piano Quartet No. 3 in C minor (Op. 60), a performance that conveyed the breadth, somber beauty and touches of wildness in this moody piece. The highlight was an arresting performance of Schoenberg’s breathless Kammersymphonie No. 1, performed here in Anton Webern’s ingeniously effective arrangement for flute, clarinet, violin, cello and piano.

Before the concert began, Wu Han, a co-director of the Chamber Music Society, announced that the esteemed violinist and conductor Joseph Silverstein had died of a heart attack at 83. Associated with the society for years, he was best known as a longtime concertmaster of the Boston Symphony. So the program became a tribute to yet another master.

Last year, the personal butler service Hello Alfred won a top prize in Silicon Valley created for promising new technology start-ups, putting the company on a path toward millions of dollars in investment.

FROM OUR ADVERTISERS





This year, the start-up has received attention of a different sort, for being at the center of a national debate about the rights of the workers hired through its service and others like it.

Unlike start-ups of years past, though, Hello Alfred has not shied from the political stage. Its leaders have appeared on numerous policy panels and have written op-eds. They have been invited to a White House summit event on the future of labor. And Marcela Sapone, the company’s chief executive, has made two trips to Capitol Hill to urge lawmakers, research organizations and the political press to rethink labor laws for the digital age.

“We have old rules about how you act as an employer,” said Ms. Sapone, 29, who started Hello Alfred with a Harvard Business School classmate. “We are a young company but we also have to make decisions early that are ethical and business-oriented, and that means engaging in Washington early.”

Photo

Marcela Sapone, co-founder and chief executive of the start-up Hello Alfred, has engaged with lawmakers to rethink labor rules for the digital age. Credit Edwin Tse for The New York Times
The efforts by Hello Alfred underscore how today’s tech companies — even the youngest ones — have accepted lobbying as an essential part of doing business. In addition to knowing the language of computer code, founders are speaking the language of Washington, keenly aware of the potential regulatory battles that could be on the horizon.

The examples are suddenly legion. Magic Leap, an augmented reality start-up, does not have a product on the market — but its lobbyists are promoting what the company may eventually do. Zenefits, an online benefits manager, is only two years old but is a member of two trade groups and has hired lobbyists and public relations strategists from the Obama administration. The chief executive of Handy, an on-demand household chores service, was recently in Washington on his third charm offensive with lawmakers.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
It is a sharp shift from past generations of tech companies, whose founders almost made it a point of pride to be distanced from, or above, politics and politicians. The antitrust troubles and headaches encountered by the older companies, including Microsoft and Google, play some role in the new thinking. The real change, though, came after Uber, the ride-hailing service, and Airbnb, the home-sharing site — two of the largest start-ups — started facing a barrage of questions about their operations.

“For these new companies, the scale of innovation is so big and impactful they necessitate interacting with Washington writ large,” said Kenneth Baer, a former spokesman for the Office of Management and Budget who now advises Zenefits. “There are huge amounts of questions that society has to grapple with that didn’t exist before.”

It is difficult to say whether all the early lobbying is delivering results. So far, it has at least allowed Uber and Airbnb to continue growing. But the arrival of money from tech companies so early in their life cycles has definitely shaken up K Street, the capital’s thoroughfare for lobbyists.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
While total annual spending on lobbying has decreased slightly over the last five years, Internet companies have tripled their lobbying spending, to $47.5 million, during the same period. The industry now spends just a little less than the auto sector, according to the website OpenSecrets, which tracks lobbying and campaign finance.

Much of that money is still from the biggest tech companies; Google and Facebook, for example, spend millions each. But in a sign of how many new companies have come to town, one trade group, the Internet Association, has tripled its membership in the last three years. And a cottage industry has emerged of boutique Internet lobbying; crisis public relations; and niche trade associations for drones, digital health services and financial technology.

“There are few industries like the Internet for which a rise in expenditures has been so dramatic,” said Sheila Krumholz, the executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics, which runs OpenSecrets.org. “They are now engaged in a number of battles where they see opportunities to push legislation or fend against legislation.”

Oisin Hanrahan is chief of Handy, a chores service. Credit Edwin Tse for The New York Times
The companies’ reach extends beyond Washington, too, with Uber and Airbnb placing lobbyists in hundreds of cities around the world. They are also putting their weight behind city and state lobbying efforts to overturn transportation, insurance and hospitality regulations that stand in their way.

For many start-ups, though, the immediate goal of lobbying is simply to create good will.

Coinbase, a digital currency platform based in San Francisco, is one of a number of financial start-ups that have looked for help in Washington, knowing that finance is highly regulated. Last year, it hired John Collins, a former senior adviser to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, as employee No. 50.

As the head of government affairs for Coinbase, Mr. Collins regularly prepares talking points about the Bitcoin virtual wallet and meets with officials at the Treasury Department, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Trade Commission and multiple congressional committees. Nearly every month, he escorts the company’s chief executive, Brian Armstrong, to meetings with government officials.

“So much of what I do day in and day out is not even advocating for anything necessarily but talking to folks about the technology,” Mr. Collins said.

The standard mantra of tech companies is that they are a boon to the economy and improve the lives of consumers. The underlying message is that any changes by regulators could cast painful ripples across the economy.

The Internet Association has taken that message straight to the congressional districts of key lawmakers. Last year, the group hosted Representative Fred Upton, Republican of Michigan and chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, on a talking tour in downtown Kalamazoo to meet shop owners who had been primed to extol the virtues of the Internet.

A jewelry store owner talked about her ability to connect inexpensively with suppliers online. Bridgett Blough, the owner of a food truck, talked about how she used the web to connect with customers, and warned that regulations would make it harder to run her business.

Senator Mark Warner has been vocal about working conditions at on-demand companies. Credit Zach Gibson/The New York Times

“These businesses may not have been businesses without the Internet,” Mr. Upton said in a video on the trade group’s website. “We don’t need to regulate the Internet. It’s not a problem as long as it’s not regulated.”

Another selling tactic is welcoming government leaders to Silicon Valley, in the hope that whimsical office spaces and over-the-top employee perks will impress Washington bureaucrats. In just the last six months, Andreessen Horowitz, a leading investor in start-ups, has hosted Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter, dozens of members of Congress, state attorneys general, and leaders from the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Trade Commission.

“For our start-ups, the advice we give is to get in early,” said Ted Ullyot, a former adviser to President George W. Bush, who is now at Andreessen Horowitz, “because the idea is not to stop regulation at a later date but to make sure they were aware and thoughtful about regulation early on.”

Perhaps no issue has become more of a focal point than the working conditions at so-called on-demand companies — businesses like Uber and Alfred, which enable customers to request a service at the touch of a button.

Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, has been one of the more vocal lawmakers on the issue and has expressed concern that freelance workers lack benefits that ensure long-term economic stability. Senator Warner has said his main concern is about whether contract workers, some of whom work dozens of hours a week, will have basic protections without classic employment contracts.

In the last six months, his office in Washington has had a steady stream of visitors, including the chief executive of Airbnb, Brian Chesky; venture capitalists; and more than 100 lobbyists for start-ups. Many of them have argued against such a classification change, saying that the costs of providing full employee benefits are too high and that their workers mostly clock part-time hours.

Unlike Uber and Instacart, Hello Alfred from the beginning categorized its workers as employees; they complete W-2 income tax forms and are entitled to benefits, training and job security.

But most of its 250 employees hold their butlering jobs to supplement other income. And Ms. Sapone says she wants lawmakers to consider new regulations that would relieve companies from providing some costly benefits.

“Why are we engaging so early? Mostly because we had to,” she said. “We have no choice but to get into these conversations.”

It wasn’t long ago that Silicon Valley and Washington mixed like oil and water.

Boy, how times have changed.

As Cecilia Kang reports, tech companies now accept lobbying in Washington as an essential part of doing business. The companies are spending more money there and executives are spending more time there.

Perhaps this is the inevitable result of tech companies entering more parts of our lives, far beyond things like games and office software and into industries like transportation and health care. In any case, how this mixture of tech and politics plays out will be worth watching closely in the months and years ahead.

In late 2011, as killings, kidnappings and sectarian strife crept across the battle-scarred city of Homs, Syria, the family of four made a sorrowful decision: to flee.

FROM OUR ADVERTISERS





Radwan Mughrbel; his wife, Sanaa Hammadeh; and their two young sons packed their bags with only a single change of clothes per person. They took a bus to Damascus and hired a taxi to spirit them across the border into Jordan. For years, they patched together a meager life, barely making enough money to eat and desperately seeking refugee status.

When the United Nations refugee agency asked where they wanted to go, the answer was obvious.

“America,” said Mr. Mughrbel, a short, wiry Muslim man of 52, his face lighting up in a smile as he sat in his bare-walled living room in this Detroit suburb last week. “They brought us here, and I feel safe, like nothing bad can happen to us. Now we have a beautiful life.”

House Speaker Paul D. Ryan spoke at a news conference on Thursday on Capitol Hill about restricting the resettlement of Syrian refugees in the United States.House Approves Tougher Refugee Screening, Defying Veto ThreatNOV. 19, 2015
Senator Rand Paul, center, on Capitol Hill on Wednesday, said he would try to block taxpayer benefits for certain new refugees.Republicans Push to Halt Syrian Refugee ProgramNOV. 18, 2015
Gov. Charlie Baker of Massachusetts in January. Mr. Baker said he G.O.P. Governors Vow to Close Doors to Syrian RefugeesNOV. 16, 2015
After Paris Attacks, C.I.A. Director Rekindles Debate Over SurveillanceNOV. 16, 2015
Yet that beautiful life has been shaken. Since the terrorist attacks in Paris, a tide of anti-refugee, anti-Muslim sentiment has swept, angrily and inexorably, across the United States. Now Mr. Mughrbel and Ms. Hammadeh say Michigan is not as welcoming a place as it was before.


Clockwise from right, Mr. Mughrbel and his wife, Sanaa Hammadeh, eating dinner with their sons, Ahmad and Soubei, at their apartment. The family fled Syria in November 2011. Credit Salwan Georges for The New York Times
Gov. Rick Snyder, who in September publicly rhapsodized about the boon that refugees were to Michigan’s economy, was among the first of more than two dozen Republican governors to vow last week that they would try to keep displaced Syrians out of their states to preserve the safety of Americans from would-be terrorists.

Presidential candidates and elected officials around the country have suggested closing mosques, collecting Syrian refugees already in the country or creating a registry for Muslims.

Sentiments like those are especially jarring in Michigan, which has one of the largest and most vibrant Arab-American populations in the country and a vocal group of advocates for bringing more Syrian refugees to the United States. In the Detroit suburbs, refugees have traded a harrowing war in the Middle East for cold winters, strip malls and neatly arranged subdivisions, with houses as uniform as Monopoly pieces.

The United States has accepted more than 1,800 Syrian refugees since October 2014. Michigan has welcomed close to 200 — more than any other state except California and Texas. The Obama administration has said it wants to bring in at least 10,000 in the next year.

Those plans have been threatened by the sudden and contentious debate over whether these refugees, many of them young children, are security threats. On Thursday, the Republican-led House voted overwhelmingly to impose new screening procedures on refugees from Syria. After Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, a Republican, said he did not want any more Syrian refugees in his state, one Syrian family destined for Indianapolis was rerouted to Connecticut.

Photo

Ms. Hammadeh reviewed her English book. The family was told in orientation to learn the language and look for jobs. Credit Salwan Georges for The New York Times
In explaining Mr. Snyder’s opposition to Syrians coming to Michigan, his spokesman, David Murray, said the state remained “unwavering” in its commitment to helping refugees.

“But our first priority is to keep Michiganders safe,” Mr. Murray said. “After tragedies such as we’ve seen in France, Lebanon and in the skies above Egypt in recent weeks, it’s proper to pause and review background and safety procedures with our partners in the federal government.”

Regardless, advocates for refugees say they have no intention to stop helping them settle here. Many more Syrian families who have waited for refugee status for years are destined for Michigan in the coming months.

Mr. Mughrbel, who arrived with his family in July, bristled at the suggestion that refugees like him could be a threat.

“We didn’t cross illegally,” he said. He threw his hands in the air. “We went through hell to get here.”

Why It Takes Two Years for Syrian Refugees to Enter the U.S.
Syrians must pass through many steps of security clearances before being admitted to the United States.

That hell started in Homs more than four years ago.

The government, under President Bashar al-Assad, had cracked down on the rebellious city, religious sects were at war with one another, and the deadly mix of bombings, snipers and random violence forced many residents indoors. Ms. Hammadeh was afraid to leave their home to shop for fresh food. On some days, the family resorted to eating moldy bread.

The couple’s sons, Soubei and Ahmad, now 19 and 18, were then in their early teens, and their parents began to fear they would be kidnapped.

“We got scared,” Ms. Hammadeh said. “The government would see kids on the street and take them, beat them. We didn’t want them to kidnap our children.”

Photo

Mr. Mughrbel and Ms. Hammadeh walked near their apartment building last week. Credit Salwan Georges for The New York Times
In November 2011, they resolved to leave.

Everything had to be left behind: furniture, photos, nearly all of their clothes. The only exception was Ms. Hammadeh’s gold wedding band and two bracelets that she slipped onto her wrist. Once the family arrived in Jordan, she sold them all for about $230.

Life in their temporary country was expensive and difficult. Mr. Mughrbel’s brother, who had also fled to Jordan, died of a heart attack. Mr. Mughrbel blamed stress.

After months of grueling trips to the United Nations refugee agency in Amman for repeated hourslong interviews as part of the refugee process, they found out they had been granted asylum.

“Our life was about to change,” Mr. Mughrbel said in Arabic through a translator. “We were going to have a safe future for our kids, live a happy life, be in a better environment, be treated like a real person.”

Photo

One of the family's sons, Ahmad, 18, visiting another Syrian refugee family in Bloomfield Hills. Michigan has nearly 200 recent Syrian refugees, more than any other state except Texas and California. Credit Salwan Georges for The New York Times
Before departing for the United States, he and his family attended four days of orientation, where they were instructed in the ways of American life. How to drive a car. How to throw banana peels and other trash in a garbage can, not on the ground.

They were also schooled in what they should focus on when they arrived. Learn English, they were told. Find a job, because America is all about work. The United States is a wonderful place, they were told. People will respect you there.

On their first morning in their new Michigan apartment, they marveled at the lawns and trees. “We didn’t walk around because we were afraid we would get lost,” Mr. Mughrbel said. “So we just looked out the window.”


Continue reading the main story
“When I saw all the grass,” said Ms. Hammadeh, 43, her large eyes widening, “I felt that I was reborn.”

She sheepishly recounted trivial missteps. A used minivan, bought for $2,500, was accidentally filled with premium gas. An unfamiliar shampoo seemed to make her hair go temporarily thin.


Mahmoud Altattan, left, the owner of Altas Greenfield Market in the Detroit suburb of Southfield, speaking with a regular customer. Mr. Altattan, 65, arrived in the United States from Syria 27 years ago. Credit Salwan Georges for The New York Times
But after four months, the family says it is financially independent, living on the earnings of the two sons, who work in a factory. Mr. Mughrbel, a cook and butcher in his native Syria, has found occasional work in a restaurant and, once his English is better, would like to open one of his own. Sometimes the family piles into the van after dinner at home and visits other Syrian families for coffee and gossip.

At home last week, family members bustled around as a soccer game played on the television, their preferred alternative to CNN and all its bleak bulletins. The smell of eggplant and spices wafted from the galley kitchen. A glance through the sliding patio doors revealed other modest but well-kept brick apartment buildings nearby.

They have kept their lives small, mostly going to work and back, and occasionally to the mosque. Mr. Mughrbel condemned the attacks in Paris. “These are criminals,” he said. “We are against this kind of stuff. You can’t just walk and kill somebody in the street. God won’t forgive you.”

Familiar Support

The task of keeping an eye on the new refugees has fallen to many of the 3,000 Syrian-Americans who have settled near Detroit for generations, a group known for its prosperity and devotion to higher education.

Paris Attacks Intensify Debate Over How Many Syrian Refugees to Allow Into the U.S.
A growing number of governors said they oppose the entry of Syrian refugees into their states.


“There’s a significant number of Syrians here, so if the refugees don’t have relatives, they’ll at least have a lot of cultural connections,” said Dawud Walid, the executive director of the Michigan chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations. “Our community in general has been very welcoming to refugees, irrespective to their national origin.”

Many established Syrians have formed volunteer organizations to assist in the resettlement process; supplied the refugees with furniture, clothing and food; and procured apartments, often at a discounted rent.

“We’re trying to help them find their way once they are here,” said Mahmoud Altattan, 65, the owner of Altas Greenfield Market, an emporium of produce, jarred olives, nuts and pita breads in Southfield, a Detroit suburb. “They have some difficulty adjusting at first. We try to put them on the right path.”

New refugees have come to his store in search of familiar comforts: pumpkin seeds, sweets and coffees from their native country. Mr. Altattan, who arrived in the United States from Syria 27 years ago and speaks softly accented English, said he advised the refugees that their most important task was to learn the language.

“Most of the Syrian community is educated people, doctors, lawyers,” said Mr. Altattan, who proudly noted that he counts a doctor and lawyer among his four grown children. “The new Syrians who are coming now are not so educated.”


Nayef Buteh, 45, right, and Feryal Jabur, 41, arrived in Detroit last week with their 8-year-old son, Arab. The family left Syria in 2013 for a refugee camp in Jordan. Credit Salwan Georges for The 
Refugee resettlement officials say many of the new refugees have worked in blue-collar jobs in Syria, as carpenters, cooks, tailors and drivers. Many were poor and vulnerable when they fled.

Case managers for the agencies that assist with resettlement spend the first few months of refugees’ time in the United States in a sort of hand-holding: making nearly daily visits to their homes, helping them book doctor’s appointments and register their children for school, and driving them to the grocery store.

“When refugees arrive to the country, they don’t know what to do,” said Jewan Poulis, a program coordinator with Lutheran Social Services of Michigan, an agency that has received about one or two Syrian families each week since June. “They have no clue what’s going on.”

Amer Sharaf, a 36-year-old Syrian refugee who arrived in Michigan in August, said he and his family had been warmly embraced by the older Syrians, who helped them by donating furniture and translating bills. A house painter when he lived in Syria, he found a job here in an automotive factory, making $9 an hour and working 50 hours a week.

But in his family’s apartment last week, as he and his wife, Marvat Mando, sipped Turkish coffee and watched their children read e-books on iPads provided by their public school, he turned to a new and troubling subject: the terrorist attacks in Paris and the governor’s subsequent criticism of Syrian refugees.


Food was set out at a hotel room in Madison Heights, Mich., for Nayef Buteh, Feryal Jabur and their son. The family arrived there about 2 a.m. Thursday after flying in from Jordan. Credit Salwan Georges for The New York Times
“It’s wrong,” Mr. Sharaf said. “Why is what happened everybody’s fault?”

Another Arrival

Last Tuesday afternoon, refugee specialists were gathered in a conference room at the suburban Detroit offices of Lutheran Social Services, discussing their final preparations for the arrival of a family of Syrian refugees on Wednesday evening.

Hani Aziz, a refugee specialist who is an Iraqi refugee himself, was assigned to pick up the family of three at 8 p.m., at the end of a long journey flying from Jordan to Frankfurt to Chicago and, finally, to Detroit.

Two days earlier, Mr. Snyder had proclaimed his opposition to new Syrian refugees entering the state. The specialists mentioned his name defiantly.


Mr. Buteh, Ms. Jabur and their son traveled from Jordan to Frankfurt to Chicago and, finally, to Detroit last week. Credit Salwan Georges for The New York Times
“If Snyder’s at the airport tomorrow, pushing them back onto the plane, then we know he’s for real,” Sean de Four, the vice president of children and family services at the agency, said wryly.

But when Wednesday evening came, the family’s flight was delayed for almost four hours. Standing in the arrivals terminal beneath an enormous Christmas wreath, Mr. Aziz scanned the crowds nervously, not knowing anything about the family except for names.

Finally, just after midnight, the family emerged, looking remarkably unrumpled: Nayef Buteh, 45; his wife, Feryal Jabur, 41; and their 8-year-old son, Arab.

Ms. Jabur was poised and elegant but sank onto a bench near the baggage claim.

“It was very tiring,” she said through a translator, looking glassy-eyed and exhausted. The couple’s son, wearing a black bomber jacket and jeans, slumped wordlessly next to her and lowered his dark eyelashes.

Mr. Buteh was polite but agitated, his eyes darting toward the exit. It had been 10 hours since his last cigarette. He stepped out into the mild November air and lit up.

“Thank God,” he said in Arabic, taking a deep drag.

Worn down by the grinding war in Syria, the family fled in March 2013 on the bed of a pickup, destined for a refugee camp in Jordan. But water was scarce there, and medical care was poor. Arab kept getting sick. The three sneaked out illegally, heading to a larger city and finding an apartment with relatives.

Close to two years later, the family was granted refugee status. “They said, ‘We’ll send you to Michigan,’” Mr. Buteh said as the minivan driven by Mr. Aziz hurtled down the nearly empty highway. “They told us it’s very beautiful, with a large Middle Eastern community and jobs in car factories.”

About 2 a.m., the van delivered the family to its small motel, where a spread of tea, chicken, rice, apples and pickles awaited on a night stand.

Mr. Buteh stepped out into the deserted parking lot and rapidly smoked another cigarette. He patted the beige, puffy coat he was wearing and glanced upward.

“I was not expecting it to be warm,” he said. “I came here expecting snow.”

“Whenever Republicans get into the White House, they mess it up. They mess it up, folks,” Hillary Rodham Clinton told a crowd gathered in a field lined with trees covered in Spanish moss here on Saturday.

At rallies these days, Mrs. Clinton criticizes the Republican presidential candidates for their economic policies (“Our economy does better with a Democrat in the White House”); she knocks their foreign policy approaches and says their positions on immigration and women’s issues would set the country “backwards instead of forwards.”

What she does not do is mention her main Democratic primary opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.

Hillary Rodham Clinton at the Democratic debate in Iowa last weekend, in which she addressed her relationship with Wall Street.Wall St. Ties Linger as Image Issue for Hillary ClintonNOV. 21, 2015
Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke about taking on the global threat of ISIS at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York on Thursday.Hillary Clinton Goes Beyond President Obama in Plan to Defeat ISISNOV. 19, 2015
First Draft: Hillary Clinton Proposes Middle-Class Tax Cut Tied to Health CareNOV. 20, 2015
At a United States-Israel relations gala in Washington in November 2012, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton talked with the dinner's host Haim Saban, center.First Draft: Major Hillary Clinton Donor Urges ‘More Scrutiny’ of MuslimsNOV. 19, 2015
President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton at the White House in 2010.Paris Attacks Complicate Hillary Clinton’s Alignment With ObamaNOV. 17, 2015
Former President Bill Clinton campaigning for his wife in Des Moines last month.First Draft: Bill Clinton to Appear for ‘Super PAC’ Backing Hillary ClintonNOV. 17, 2015
Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland last month.Hillary Clinton Relying on Southern Primaries to Fend Off RivalsSEPT. 5, 2015
Mrs. Clinton has regained her footing in the polls in Iowa and New Hampshire, and she has locked in the support of major labor unions and over half the Democratic Party’s superdelegates, party leaders and elected officials, needed to secure the nomination. She is now acting as if she were no longer running against one rival, Mr. Sanders, but 14: the Republicans who are still preoccupied with cutting down one another.


Senator Bernie Sanders greeted the crowd on Saturday in North Charleston, S.C. Credit Mic Smith/Associated Press
A substantial lead in the polls could prompt any candidate to look beyond the primary to try to get a head start on the general election, but in Mrs. Clinton’s case, gazing past Mr. Sanders to next November is part of the intensified strategy to defeat him.

Even voters who support Mr. Sanders often say that Mrs. Clinton appears more electable when compared with a Republican nominee. And while her economic message, considering her ties to Wall Street and the “super PAC” supporting her, can seem muddled when contrasted with Mr. Sanders’s, it sounds more forceful to Democratic voters compared with Republican proposals. And, as a campaign aide points out, the Republican candidates consistently criticize Mrs. Clinton, so it makes sense for her to punch back.

“I love Bernie, and I feel he’d get something done about the lopsided distribution of wealth in this country,” said Siobhan Hansen, 58, an undecided voter in Charleston. “But,” she added, “I hate to admit it but I just think Hillary has a better chance in the general election.”

Even as Mrs. Clinton’s campaign has invested heavily in Iowa and New Hampshire and her schedule revolves around states with early primaries, her message has become a broader rejoinder reminding voters of the 2008 financial crisis and linking the Republican candidates to the foreclosures and joblessness that President Obama inherited. It is a strategy her campaign believes will be effective in a general election contest after having a dry run before the primaries.

“They are running on the same economic policies that have failed us before,” Mrs. Clinton said at a rally in Memphis on Friday. She did not mention Mr. Sanders, but his stances on wealth and income have seemed to influence his rival’s populist tone. “Trickledown economics, cut taxes on the wealthy, get out of the way of big corporations,” she said. “Well, we know how that story ends, don’t we?”


At a town-hall-style event in Grinnell, Iowa, this month, Mrs. Clinton, talking about the importance of voter participation, even seemed to forget, albeit briefly, that the short-term goal was to win the Iowa caucuses. “If not me, I hope you caucus for somebody,” she said. She paused. “I hope more of you caucus for me.”

Mrs. Clinton is focused on capturing the nomination and has been contrasting herself with the Republicans since she announced her candidacy in April, the campaign aide said.


Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, Jeff Weaver, said Mrs. Clinton’s obsession with the Republican Party is a tactic to diminish her main Democratic primary opponent, whose economic message has attracted enormous crowds and enthusiasm.

As Mr. Sanders delivered his standard speech about inequality here on Saturday, Mr. Weaver closely watched the voters in the front row who wore blue “H” T-shirts, indicating their support for Mrs. Clinton, as they cheered for Mr. Sanders several times.

“We are much closer to Secretary Clinton today than Senator Obama was in 2008,” Mr. Weaver said. “I don’t think they think this is locked up.”

Mrs. Clinton may have been helped by the campaign’s shift to foreign policy, where Mr. Sanders is seen as weaker, after the Nov. 13 terrorist attack in Paris. Mrs. Clinton said in a speech in New York on Thursday that the Republicans’ approach to fighting the Islamic State, compared with her own, amounted to “a choice between fear and resolve.” She derided as un-American the Republicans who said they would either bar Syrian refugees from resettling in the United States or allow only Christian refugees.

“There are forces no candidate can control, and they can be detrimental,” Representative James E. Clyburn, Democrat of South Carolina, said when asked about the newfound focus on defeating the Islamic State. “I believe in this case third-party forces are working in her favor.”

Among Democrats, Mrs. Clinton holds a 25 percentage point lead over Mr. Sanders nationally, according to a Bloomberg Politics poll released on Friday. She had a nine-point advantage in the same poll in September, when it included Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who later said he would not seek the nomination.

“By turning up the heat on Republicans, going after Trump, that’s all part of the essence of saying, ‘I am the leader of the Democratic Party,’ ” said Robert Shrum, a strategist for Democratic presidential candidates including John Kerry and Al Gore.


The primary is by no means determined. Polls in Iowa, in particular, tend to undercount Mr. Sanders’s young supporters who do not have landline phones, his aides say. And he continues to lead in some polls in New Hampshire, which was supposed to be a stronghold for Mrs. Clinton.

Even as Mrs. Clinton focuses firmly on the Republicans, her campaign is increasing its indirect, if aggressive, moves to squeeze Mr. Sanders.

She has secured the backing of major labor unions, including most recently the Service Employees International Union, which has two million members. Her campaign has emphasized Mrs. Clinton’s commitment to gun control, an issue that Mr. Sanders, as a senator from a hunting state, has been less vehement about, and she delivered a major foreign policy speech on Thursday in New York, the same day Mr. Sanders delivered a speech about Democratic socialism in Washington. (“Ah, the attempted bigfoot,” Mr. Weaver said of the timing of the two speeches. The Clinton campaign announced its speech a day earlier than the Sanders team.)


Mrs. Clinton has also started to imply that Mr. Sanders’s single-payer “Medicare for All” health care plan would amount to a middle-class tax increase.

In recent days, she has unveiled a plan to give Americans with unexpected medical costs a tax credit of $2,500 for an individual or $5,000 for a family. On Sunday in Iowa, she introduced another tax credit to cover up to $6,000 of medical expenses for middle-class families caring for ailing parents or grandparents. “I believe you deserve a raise, not a tax increase,” she said in Memphis.

The Sanders campaign said that his plan would save the average family $5,000 a year through the elimination of premiums, deductibles and co-payments, and it called Mrs. Clinton’s plan “Republican-lite” because it proposed short-term tax cuts over long-term benefits.

Mrs. Clinton’s opponents point out that there is no more precarious place for her to be than when she seems inevitable, as she did in the early months of the 2008 Democratic primary before she finished third in the Iowa caucuses behind Senators Barack Obama and John Edwards.

This month, just after Mrs. Clinton had officially put her name on the ballot in New Hampshire, she took some questions from local reporters at the State House in Concord. The first question: “How does it feel to once again be inevitable?”

Mrs. Clinton said she had put her name on the ballot in that very room in 2007. “I’m back again,” she said. “I intend to do everything I can to work as hard as possible to be successful this time.”

ometimes the eye of the artist inspires science. For Sébastien Moulinet, a French physicist, the artwork that caught his attention was a photograph of a balloon by Jacques Honvault.

The balloon was in the middle of bursting and the way it was fragmenting made Dr. Moulinet, a lecturer in physics at the École Normale Supérieure, think of how to study the way cracks, or what look like rips or tears, spread in a surface under tension.

He had also seen videos of weather balloons as they rose to a point in the atmosphere where lower pressure made the helium inside expand and the balloons burst into fragments.

So he used high-speed video to record a latex balloon popping in the laboratory and he and his colleague, Mokhtar Adda-Bedia, a theoretician, analyzed the results.

As they reported in Physical Review Letters on Oct. 30, the balloons had two modes of bursting. When the balloon was at low inflation and the latex at low tension, a popped balloon split along one or two cracks.

But there was a threshold, and after that level of tension in the latex, the number of cracks increased along with the tension, from four at first up to 10 or 40, depending on the tension.

Dr. Moulinet is interested in instability in different materials. The balloon splits in a way that indicates a particular kind of instability in which a single crack then turns into others.

And the equations that describe the ways that latex under tension fragments will hold true for other materials as well, like glass, where the process of shattering is of practical as well as aesthetic and intellectual interest.

Three years have passed since a case of Type 3 wild polio virus has been detected in the world, which means that particular viral subtype has most likely disappeared forever, the World Health Organization announced this month.

Its demise could speed up the drive to eliminate polio, which has gone on for 27 years and now costs more than $1 billion a year.

The last known Type 3 polio case was an 11-month-old boy in northern Nigeria who became paralyzed on Nov. 10, 2012.

When vaccines were first invented in the 1950s, there were three polio strains, which had nicknames. Type 1, by far the most common, was named Brunhilde, after a chimpanzee in the lab of the scientist leading the work.

Type 2 was Lansing, after the Michigan city where it was isolated from a dying patient. Type 3 was Leon, after a Los Angeles boy who died of it. The names later fell out of favor.


Polio survivors in Nigeria played para-soccer. No polio cases have been detected in Africa for one year.A Milestone in Africa: No Polio Cases in a YearAUG. 11, 2015
­Children playing in Karachi, Pakistan, one of the few places where polio can still be found.Global Health: Final Salvos Against PolioJUNE 8, 2015
Lens Blog: Photographing the Front Lines of the Global Battle Against PolioSEPT. 30, 2015
Type 2 has not been seen since 1999, so it is now likely that only Type 1 remains. If so, the fight against the disease may become more efficient.


In 2009, after experts waited a decade to be sure that Type 2 was gone forever, they began removing that strain from the trivalent oral vaccine, which works against all three types.

The three strains of weakened live virus in the oral vaccine compete with one another to attach to receptors in the gut. Removing one type of polio virus meant children developed full immunity after fewer doses.

Once experts are sure Type 3 is gone, they may decide to switch to a monovalent vaccine containing only Type 1.

But all types of polio may be eradicated even before that happens. Wild-type polio, caused by circulating viruses, is now found in only two countries, Pakistan and across the border in Afghanistan.

And cases are declining sharply in both countries as the Pakistani military has expanded its power, fighting its way into Taliban-controlled areas where most of the vaccine resistance has been. When families are displaced, children are vaccinated at highway checkpoints and border crossings.

As of Nov. 17, only 56 cases had been detected, far fewer than the 290 that had been found by the same date in 2014.

Wild-type cases may soon be outnumbered by vaccine-derived polio. Those cases occur when a weakened vaccine strain mutates enough to cause paralysis.

Seventeen cases in five other countries have been detected this year. Those outbreaks are usually stopped by giving all children in the region injections of killed vaccine and follow-up doses of the oral one.
