Generations of science-fiction movies have conditioned us to consider bug-eyed monsters, large-brained intellectual humanoids, and other rather sophisticated extraterrestrial creatures as typical examples of life outside Earth.
The reality, however, is that finding any kind of life at all, even something as simple as bacteria, would be one of the most exciting discoveries ever made.
The consensus within the scientific community seems to be that we eventually will find not only life in other parts of the galaxy but also intelligent and technologically advanced life.
I have to say that I disagree.
While I believe we will find other forms of life in other solar systems (if not in our own), I also feel it is extremely unlikely that a large number of advanced technological civilizations are out there, waiting to be discovered.
The most succinct support for my view comes from Nobel laureate physicist Enrico Fermi, the man who ran the first nuclear reaction ever controlled by human beings.
Confronted at a 1950 luncheon with scientific arguments for the ubiquity of technologically advanced civilizations, he supposedly said, “So where is everybody?”
This so-called Fermi Paradox embodies a simple logic.
Human beings have had modern science only a few hundred years, and already we have moved into space.
It is not hard to imagine that in a few hundred more years we will be a starfaring people, colonizing other systems.
Fermi’s argument maintains that it is extremely unlikely that many other civilizations discovered science at exactly the same time we did.
Had they acquired science even a thousand years earlier than we, they now could be so much more advanced that they would already be colonizing our solar system.
If, on the other hand, they are a thousand years behind us, we will likely arrive at their home planet before they even begin sending us radio signals.
Technological advances build upon each other, increasing technological
abilities faster than most people anticipate.
Imagine, for example, how astounded even a great seventeenth-century scientist like Isaac Newton would be by our current global communication system, were he alive today.
Where are those highly developed extraterrestrial civilizations so dear
to the hearts of science-fiction writers?
Their existence is far from a foregone conclusion. 

Although posed in the most casual of circumstances, the Fermi Paradox has reverberated through the decades and has at times threatened to destroy the credibility of those scientists seriously engaged in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) research program.
One possible answer to Fermi’s question (“If there are extraterrestrials, where are they?”) is that extraterrestrials have in fact often visited Earth, and continue to do so.
This is the answer of those who believe in the existence of unidentified flying objects, or UFO’s.
But few scientists, even those engaged in SETI, take the UFO claims
seriously.
“You won’t find anyone around here who believes in UFO’s,” says Frank Drake, a well-known SETI scientist.
If one discounts the UFO claims, yet still believes that there are many technological civilizations in the galaxy, why have they not visited us?
Drake’s answer is straightforward: “High-speed interstellar travel is so demanding of resources and so hazardous that intelligent civilizations don’t attempt it.”
And why should they attempt it, when radio communication can supply all
the information they might want?
At first glance, Drake’s argument seems very persuasive.
The distances between stars are truly immense.
To get from Earth to the nearest star and back, traveling at 99 percent of the speed of light, would take 8 years.
And SETI researchers have shown that, to accelerate a spacecraft to such a speed, to bring it to a stop, and to repeat the process in the reverse direction, would take almost unimaginable amounts of energy.
Astronomer Ben Zuckerman challenges Drake’s notion that technological beings would be satisfied with radio communication.
“Drake’s implicit assumption is that the only thing we’re going to care about is intelligent life.
But what if we have an interest in simpler life-forms?
If you turn the picture around and you have some advanced extraterrestrials looking at the Earth, until the last hundred years there was no evidence of intelligent life but for billions of years before that they could have deduced that this was a very unusual world and that there were probably living creatures on it.
They would have had billions of years to come investigate.”
Zuckerman contends that the reason extraterrestrials haven’t visited us is that so few exist. 

Georgia was to be married.
It was the week before Christmas, and on the last day of the year she would become Mrs. Joseph Tank.
She had told Joe that if they were to be married at all they might as well get it over with this year, and still there was no need of being
married any earlier in the year than was necessary.
She assured him that she married him simply because she was tired of having paper bags waved before her eyes everywhere she went and she thought if she were once officially associated with him people would not flaunt his idiosyncrasies at her that way.
And then Ernestine, her best friend, approved of getting married, and Ernestine’s ideas were usually good.
To all of which Joe responded that she certainly had a splendid head to figure it out that way.
Joe said that to his mind reasons for doing things weren’t very important anyhow; it was doing them that counted.
Yesterday had been her last day on the paper.
She had felt queer about that thing of taking her last assignment, though it was hard to reach just the proper state, for the last story related to pork-packers, and pork-packing is not a setting favorable to sentimental regrets.
It was just like the newspaper business not even to allow one a little sentimental harrowing over one’s exodus from it.
But the time for gentle melancholy came later on when she was sorting her things at her desk just before leaving, and was wondering what girl would have that old desk—if they cared to risk another girl, and whether the other poor girl would slave through the years she should have been frivolous, only to have some man step in at the end and induce her to surrender the things she had gained through sacrifice and toil.
As she wrote a final letter on her typewriter—she did hate letting the old machine go—Georgia did considerable philosophizing about the irony of working for things only to the end of giving them up.
She had waded through snowdrifts and been drenched in pouring rains, she had been frozen with the cold and prostrated with the heat, she had
been blown about by Chicago wind until it was strange there was any of her left in one piece, she had had front doors—yes, and back doors too—slammed in her face, she had been the butt of the alleged wit of menials and hirelings, she had been patronized by vapid women as the poor girl who must make her living some way, she had been roasted by—but never mind—she had had a beat* or two!
And now she was to wind it all up by marrying Joseph Tank, who had made a great deal of money out of the manufacture of paper bags.
This from her—who had always believed she would end her days in New York, or perhaps write a realistic novel exposing some mighty evil! 

Ridiculing television, and warning about its inherent evils, is nothing new.
It has been that way since the medium was invented, and television hasn’t exactly been lavished with respect as the decades have passed.
I suspect, though, that a lot of the fear and loathing directed at television comes out of a time-honored, reflexive overreaction to the dominant medium of the moment.
For the past several decades, television has been blamed for corrupting our youth and exciting our adults, distorting reality, and basically being a big, perhaps dangerous, waste of time.
Before TV, radio and film were accused of the same things.
And long before that—in fact, some 2,500 years earlier—philosophers were arguing that poetry and drama should be excluded from any ideal city on much the same grounds.
In Book 10 of the Republic, Plato (428-348 B.C.) attacks epic poet Homer (c. 850 B.C.) and the tragedians on several grounds, all of which have a familiar ring.
“Their productions are appearances and not realities,” he gripes.
“Drawing, and in fact all imitation . . . [is] quite removed from the truth.”
The audience, as well as the art form, troubled Plato, whose remarks are colored by an implied disdain for the popularity of public performances.
The “common people,” as Plato so charitably calls them, are drawn to “peevish and diverse” characters—such as Odysseus and other heroes in the Iliad and the Odyssey— who (to Plato, anyway) engage in such questionable displays of emotion as “spinning out a long melancholy lamentation” or “disfiguring themselves in grief.”
To Plato, baring such intimate sorrows is not to be condoned.
(Clearly, he would have given thumbs down to the central characters of Shakespeare’s Hamlet and Macbeth.)
“If you receive the pleasure-seasoned Muse1 of song and epic,” Plato warns, “pleasure and pain will be kings in your city, instead of law.”
Finally, Plato sums up his anti-arts argument with the cold, sweeping pronouncement that “poetry is not to be taken seriously.”
One academic who has studied and written extensively about both Plato and television suggests that Plato, rather than being anti-arts, was merely an elitist.
Plato wanted to ban poetry readings and live theater, the argument goes, because, being free and accessible and raucous and extremely popular, they were the mass entertainment of that era.
“If, instead of ‘tragedy’ and ‘poetry,’ and ‘Homer’ and ‘Aeschylus,’2 you read ‘mass entertainment’ or ‘popular media,’ you’ll recognize Plato’s arguments as the ancestor of all the reasons we have today for being suspicious of television.”
To wit: poetry, by which Plato means drama, confuses us between appearance and reality.
The action it presents is too extreme and violent.
Most important, it’s a corrupting influence, perverting its audience by bombarding it with inferior characters and vulgar subjects—and 
constituting, in Plato’s own words, “a harm to the mind of its audience.”
If Plato’s Republic had become reality, it would have been a republic with a lot of empty libraries, theaters, and museums—if, indeed, those repositories of the arts would have survived at all.
Plato’s personal utopia never came to pass—but throughout the centuries, wherever and whenever a new medium of artistic expression attracted a lot of people, someone has been ready, waiting, and eager to attack its content and fear its impact. 

Under my desk I keep a large carton of cassette tapes.
Though they have all been transcribed, I still like to listen to them from time to time.
Some are quiet and easily understood.
They are filled with the voices of American doctors, interrupted occasionally by the clink of a coffee cup or beep of a pager.
The rest—more than half of them—are very noisy.
They are filled with the voices of the Lees family, Hmong refugees from Laos who came to the United States in 1980.
Against a background of babies crying, children playing, doors slamming, dishes clattering, a television yammering, and an air conditioner wheezing, I can hear the mother’s voice, by turns breathy, nasal, gargly, or humlike as it slides up and down the Hmong language’s eight tones; the father’s voice, louder, slower, more vehement; and my interpreter’s voice, mediating in Hmong and English, low and deferential in each.
The hubbub summons sense-memories: the coolness of the red metal folding chair, reserved for guests, that was always set up when I arrived in the apartment; the shadows cast by the amulet that hung from the ceiling and swung in the breeze on its length of grocer’s twine; the tastes of Hmong food.
I sat on the Lees’ red chair for the first time on May 19, 1988.
Earlier that spring I had come to Merced, California, because I had heard that there were some misunderstandings at the county hospital between its Hmong patients and medical staff.
One doctor called them “collisions,” which made it sound as if two different kinds of people had rammed into each other, head on, to the accompaniment of squealing brakes and breaking glass.
As it turned out, the encounters were messy but rarely frontal.
Both sides were wounded, but neither side seemed to know what had hit it or how to avoid another crash.
I have always felt that the action most worth watching occurs not at the center of things but where edges meet.
I like shorelines, weather fronts, international borders.
These places have interesting frictions and incongruities, and often, if you stand at the point of tangency, you can see both sides better than if you were in the middle of either one.
This is especially true when the apposition is cultural.
When I first came to Merced, I hoped that the culture of American medicine, about which I knew a little, and the culture of the Hmong, about which I knew nothing, would somehow illuminate each other if I could position myself between the two and manage not to get caught in the crossfire.
But after getting to know the Lees family and their daughter’s doctors and realizing how hard it was to blame anyone, I stopped analyzing the situation in such linear terms.
Now, when I play the tapes late at night, I imagine what they would sound like if I could splice them together, so the voices of the Hmong and those of the American doctors could be heard on a single tape, speaking a common language.

Cloning creates serious issues of identity and individuality.
The cloned person may experience concerns about his or her distinctive identity, not only because the person will be in genotype (genetic makeup) and appearance identical to another human being, but, in this case, because he or she may also be twin to the person who is the “father” or “mother”—if one can still call them that.
What would be the psychic burdens of being the “child” or “parent” of your twin?
The cloned individual, moreover, will be saddled with a genotype that has already lived.
He or she will not be fully a surprise to the world.
People will likely always compare a clone’s performance in life with that of the original.
True, a cloned person’s nurture and circumstances in life will be different; genotype is not exactly destiny.
Still, one must also expect parental and other efforts to shape this new life after the original—or at least to view the child with the original vision always firmly in mind.
Why else then would they clone from the star basketball player, mathematician, and beauty queen—or even dear old dad—in the first place?
Since the birth of Dolly, there has been a fair amount of doublespeak on this matter of genetic identity.
Experts have rushed in to reassure the public that the clone would in no way be the same person, or have any confusions about his or her identity; they are pleased to point out that the clone of film star Julia Roberts would not be Julia Roberts.
Fair enough.
But one is shortchanging the truth by emphasizing the additional importance of the environment, rearing, and social setting: genotype obviously matters plenty.
That, after all, is the only reason to clone, whether human beings or sheep.
The odds that clones of basketball star Larry Bird will play basketball are, I submit, infinitely greater than they are for clones of jockey Willie Shoemaker.

Given all the brouhaha, you’d think it was crystal clear why cloning human beings is unethical.
But what exactly is wrong with it?
What would a clone be?
Well, he or she would be a complete human being who happens to share the same genes with another person.
Today, we call such people identical twins.
To my knowledge no one has argued that twins are immoral.
“You should treat all clones like you would treat all monozygous [identical] twins or triplets,” concludes Dr. H. Tristam Engelhardt, a professor of medicine at Baylor and a philosopher at Rice University.
“That’s it.”
It would be unethical to treat a human clone as anything other than a human being.
Some argue that the existence of clones would undermine the uniqueness of each human being.
“Can individuality, identity, and dignity be severed from genetic distinctiveness, and from belief in a person’s open future?” asks political thinker George Will.
Will and others have fallen under the sway of what one might call “genetic essentialism,” the belief that genes almost completely determine who a person is.
But a person who is a clone would live in a very different world from that of his or her genetic predecessor.
With greatly divergent experiences, their brains would be wired differently.
After all, even twins who grow up together are separate people—distinct individuals with different personalities and certainly no lack of Will’s “individuality, identity, and dignity.”
But what about cloning exceptional human beings?
George Will put it this way: “Suppose a clone of basketball star Michael Jordan, age 8, preferred violin to basketball?
Is it imaginable?
If so, would it be tolerable to the cloner?”
Yes, it is imaginable, and the cloner would just have to put up with violin recitals.
Kids are not commercial property.
Overzealous parents regularly push their children into sports, music, and dance lessons, but given the stubborn nature of individuals, those parents rarely manage to make kids stick forever to something they hate.
A ban on cloning wouldn’t abolish pushy parents.

“I never thought I would live in such a beautiful place,” Mrs. Deverell told Angel when they first moved in.
But nowadays she often suffered from the lowering pain of believing herself happy when she was not.
“Who could be miserable in such a place?” she asked.
Yet, on misty October evenings or on Sundays, when the church bells began, sensations she had never known before came over her.
She sometimes felt better when she went back to see her friends on Volunteer Street; but it was a long way to go.
Angel discouraged the visits, and her friends seemed to have changed.
Either they put out their best china and thought twice before they said anything, or they were defiantly informal—“You’ll have to take us as you find us”—and would persist in making remarks like “Pardon the apron, but there’s no servants here to polish the grate.”
In each case, they were watching her for signs of grandeur or condescension.
She fell into little traps they laid and then they were able to report to the neighbors.
“It hasn’t taken her long to start putting on airs.”
She had to be especially careful to recognize everyone she met, and walked up the street with an expression of anxiety which was misinterpreted as disdain.
The name “Deverell Family Grocer” stayed for a long time over the shop, and she was pleased that it should, although Angel frowned with annoyance when she heard of it.
Then one day the faded name was scraped and burnt away, and on her next visit to Volunteer Street, she saw that “Cubbage’s Stores” was painted there instead.
She felt an unaccountable panic and dismay at the sight of this and at the strange idea of other people and furniture in those familiar rooms.
“Very nice folk,” she was told.
“She’s so friendly.
Always the same.
And such lovely kiddies.”
Mrs. Deverell felt slighted and wounded; going home she was so preoccupied that she passed the wife of the landlord of The Volunteer without seeing her.
“I wouldn’t expect Alderhurst people to speak to a barkeep’s wife,” the woman told everyone in the saloon bar.
“Even though it was our Gran who laid her husband out when he died.”
All of their kindnesses were remembered and brooded over; any past kindness Mrs. Deverell had done—and they were many—only served to underline the change which had come over her.
At a time of her life when she needed the security of familiar things, these were put beyond her reach.
It seemed to her that she had wasted her years acquiring skills which in the end were to be of no use to her: her weather-eye for a good drying day; her careful ear for judging the gentle singing sound of meat roasting in the oven; her touch for the freshness of meat; and how, by smelling a cake, she could tell if it were baked.
These arts, which had taken so long to perfect, fell now into disuse.
She would never again, she grieved, gather up a great fragrant line of washing in her arms to carry indoors.
One day when they had first come to the new house, she had passed through the courtyard where sheets were hanging out: she had taken them in her hands and, finding them just at the right stage of drying, had begun to unpeg them.
They were looped all about her shoulders when Angel caught her.
“Please leave work to the people who should do it,” she had said.
“You will only give offense.”
She tried hard not to give offense; but it was difficult.
The smell of ironing being done or the sound of eggs being whisked set up a restlessness which she could scarcely control.
The relationship of mother and daughter seemed to have been reversed, and Angel, now in her early twenties, was the authoritative one; since girlhood she had been taking on one responsibility after another, until she had left her mother with nothing to perplex her but how to while away the hours when the servants were busy and her daughter was at work.
Fretfully, she would wander around the house, bored, but afraid to interrupt; she was like an intimidated child.

Now, what are we to make of this sputtering debate, in which charges of imperialism are met by equally passionate accusations of vandalism, in which each side hates the other, and yet each seems to have its share of reason?
It occurs to me that perhaps what we have here is one of those debates in which the opposing sides, unbeknownst to themselves, share a myopia that will turn out to be the most interesting and important feature of the whole discussion, a debate, for instance, like that of the Founding Fathers over the nature of the franchise.
Think of all the energy and passion spent debating the question of property qualifications, or direct versus legislative elections, while all along, unmentioned and unimagined, was the fact—to us so central—that women and slaves were never considered for any kind of vote.
While everyone is busy fighting over what should be taught in the classroom, something is being overlooked.
That is the state of reading, and books, and literature in our country, at this time.
Why, ask yourself, is everyone so hot under the collar about what to put on the required-reading shelf?
It is because, while we have been arguing so fiercely about which books make the best medicine, the patient has been slipping deeper and deeper into a coma.
Let us imagine a country in which reading was a popular voluntary activity.
There, parents read books for their own edification and pleasure and are seen by their children at this silent and mysterious pastime.
These parents also read to their children, give them books for presents, talk to them about books, and underwrite, with their taxes, a public library system that is open all day, every day.
In school, the children study certain books together but also have an active reading life of their own.
Years later, it may even be hard for them to remember if they read Jane Eyre at home and Judy Blume1 in class or the other way around.
In college, young people continue to be assigned certain books, but far more important are the books they discover for themselves browsing in the library, in bookstores, on the shelves of friends, one book leading to another, back and forth in history and across languages and cultures.
After graduation, they continue to read and in the fullness of time produce a new generation of readers.
Oh happy land!
I wish we all lived there.
In that country of real readers, voluntary, active, selfdetermined readers, a debate like the current one over the canon would not be taking place.
Or if it did, it would be as a kind of parlor game: What books would you take to a desert island?
Everyone would know that the top-ten list was merely a tiny fraction of the books one would read in a lifetime.
It would not seem racist or sexist or hopelessly hidebound to put Nathaniel Hawthorne on the list and not Toni Morrison.
It would be more like putting oatmeal and not noodles on the breakfast menu—a choice partly arbitrary, partly a nod to the national past, and partly, dare one say it, a kind of reverse affirmative action: School might frankly be the place where one reads the books that are a little off-putting, that have gone a little cold, that you might overlook because they do not address, in readerfriendly contemporary fashion, the issues most immediately at stake in modern life but that, with a little study, turn out to have a great deal to say.
Being on the list wouldn’t mean so much.
It might even add to a writer’s cachet not to be on the list, to be in one way or another too heady, too daring, too exciting to be ground up into institutional fodder for teenagers.
Generations of high school kids have been turned off to George Eliot by being forced to read Silas Marner at a tender age.
One can imagine a whole new readership for her if grown-ups were left to approach Middlemarch and Daniel Deronda with open minds, at their leisure. 

Inside, we sat on wonderfully comfortable seats that were tilted back so that you lay in a sort of a hammock, attention directed to the bowl of the ceiling, which soon turned dark blue, with a faint rim of light around the edge.
There was some splendid, commanding music.
The adults all around were shushing the children, trying to make them stop crackling their potato chip bags.
Then a man’s voice, an eloquent professional voice, began to speak slowly, out of the walls.
The voice reminded me a little of the way radio announcers used to introduce a piece of classical music or describe the progress of the Royal Family to Westminster Abbey on one of their royal occasions.
There was a faint echo-chamber effect.
The dark ceiling was filled with stars.
They came out not all at once but one after another, the way stars really do come out at night, though more quickly.
The Milky Way galaxy appeared, was moving closer; stars swam into brilliance and kept on going, disappearing beyond the edges of the sky-screen or behind my head.
While the flow of light continued, the voice presented the stunning facts.
From a few light-years away, it announced, the Sun appears as a bright star, and the planets are not visible.
From a few dozen light-years away, the Sun is not visible, either, to the naked eye.
And that distance—a few dozen light-years—is only about a thousandth part of the distance from the Sun to the center of our galaxy, one galaxy, which itself contains about two hundred billion stars.
And is, in turn, one of millions, perhaps billions, of galaxies.
Innumerable repetitions, innumerable variations.
All this rolled past my head, too, like balls of lightning.
Now realism was abandoned, for familiar artifice.
A model of the solar system was spinning away in its elegant style.
A bright bug took off from the Earth, heading for Jupiter.
I set my dodging and shrinking mind sternly to recording facts.
The mass of Jupiter two and a half times that of all the other planets put together.
The Great Red Spot.
The thirteen moons.
Past Jupiter, a glance at the eccentric orbit of Pluto, the icy rings of Saturn.
Back to Earth and moving in to hot and dazzling Venus.
Atmospheric pressure ninety times ours.
Moonless Mercury rotating three times while circling the Sun twice; an odd arrangement, not as satisfying as what they used to tell us—that it rotated once as it circled the Sun.
No perpetual darkness after all.
Why did they give out such confident information, only to announce later that it was quite wrong?
Finally, the picture already familiar from magazines: the red soil of Mars, the blooming pink sky.
When the show was over I sat in my seat while children clambered over me, making no comments on anything they had just seen or heard.
They were pestering their keepers for eatables and further entertainments.
An effort had been made to get their attention, to take it away from canned drinks and potato chips and fix it on various knowns and unknowns and horrible immensities, and it seemed to have failed.
A good thing, too, I thought.
Children have a natural immunity, most of them, and it shouldn’t be tampered with.
As for the adults who would deplore it, the ones who promoted this show, weren’t they immune themselves to the extent that they could put in the echo-chamber effects, the music, the solemnity, simulating the awe that they supposed they ought to feel?
Awe—what was that supposed to be?
A fit of the shivers when you looked out the window?
Once you knew what it was, you wouldn’t be courting it.

It was no accident that nineteenth-century naturalist Charles Darwin strove to connect the mentality and emotionality of people with that of dogs, rather than, say, doves or horses.
Neither his theory of evolution nor any general understanding of biology demanded that he preferentially underline our similarity to dogs over other species.
But politically and emotionally, the choice was inevitable for an English gentleman who had set himself the task of making the idea of evolutionary continuity palatable.
Darwin wrote that “dogs possess something very similar to a conscience.
They certainly possess some power of self-command. . . . Dogs have long been accepted as the very type of fidelity and obedience.”
Darwin was not alone in his beliefs that dogs possess human virtues.
The characteristics of loyalty and obedience, coupled with an expressive face and body, can account for why dogs are such popular and valued pets in many cultures.
Depending on the breed and the individual, dogs can be noble, charming, affectionate, and reliable.
But while all dog owners should rightly appreciate these and other endearing traits in their pets, nothing says that the cleverness of a highly intelligent primate such as a chimpanzee is part of the package.
Scientists generally believe the reasoning abilities of chimps to be considerably greater than that of dogs.
But many people nonetheless believe that dogs are smarter than chimps precisely because of our familiarity and emotional ties with the dogs that we love.
We apply the same secret rules to our fellow humans: the old in-group, out-group story.
People in your in-group are those who are similar to you, either because they belong to the same organizations as you, or enjoy the same activities, or, and this is the kicker, because they are simply around more often.
Dogs, because of their proximity to their owners, are definitely in.
The intensity of our relationship with dogs causes us, quite naturally, to imbue them with high-level mental abilities, whether they have earned those extra intelligence points or not.
We like them, so we think well of them. 

Hawaiian quilts, such as those created by Marthe Marques and Helen Friend, reflect an eclectic blend of early American quilt making, Hawaiian tradition, island imagery, spiritual influences, current events, and modern vision.
Helen Friend, a recognized contemporary Hawaiian artist, produces quilted artworks inspired by nature’s power, Hawaii’s natural environment, current events, and historic textiles.
Her quilt titled I ka Ho’okumuana (In the Beginning) depicts an aerial view of an erupting volcano constructed of appliqued red flames set against a black background fabric.
This quilt embraces both the past and the future; it clearly falls within the provenance of a traditional Hawaiian quilt, and at the same time it challenges the boundaries of that definition.
While many historians claim that New England Missionaries brought quilting to the islands in 1820, it has been reported that Hawaiian women fashioned decorative bed coverings, called kapa moe, long before the missionaries’ arrival.
Kapa moe were constructed from multiple layers of tapa, a paper-like fabric crafted from mulberry bark.
The top layer of tapa was often dyed and decorated with beautiful geometric designs.
The layers, each one comprised of a large piece of fabric, were stitched together, possibly to provide additional resilience.
With the arrival of the missionaries, Hawaiian quilters were introduced to American materials, quilting methods and designs.
The missionaries brought metal needles, cotton fabrics, and cotton thread to Hawaii.
In addition, they taught the native women to work with both patchwork and appliqued quilting.
In patchwork quilting, designs on the quilt’s top layer are created by piercing small bits of fabric together to form patterns, then overstitched with contrasting designs when the layers of the quilt are united.
With appliqued quilts, the quilt’s top layer is decorated with pieces of fabric cut to form images and designs.
While many patchwork quilts incorporate small geometric shapes in various colors aligned to form larger geometric shapes, appliqued quilting allows quilters to express more natural shapes and images.

As difficult as it may be to comprehend the abstract shapes and forms of contemporary paintings and sculptures, it may be even more difficult for most people today to appreciate the art of ancient times. Though the individuals who create these works thousands of years ago were not, mentally or emotionally, so different from ourselves, few of us are willing to do what is necessary to understand the true beauty of ancient masterpieces.
But what, after all, is required of the viewer to understand the beauty of art, beyond the capacity to perceive it? Why should ancient art require more effort to appreciate than contemporary works? The answer, in a word, is context.
In order to obtain a new sense of meaning in a work of art, we must interpret its depictions using the cultural language of our time.
If we see a painting of a man in a business suit or a hard hat, we have some idea of what his life is like and can therefore understand the work emotionally.
Even abstract works are prone to the effects of cultural context; our aesthetic sensibilities for features like shape and color are shaped from birth by the colors and shapes that appear in our environment.
For modern art, these examples might seem obvious, even trivial. Virtually everyone possesses the necessary contextual frame to understand the contemporary art of their own particular culture.
When viewing ancient art, however, most of us fail to realize how very different the artist’s life was from our own, and we end up seeing through the wrong set of eyes.
Take, for instance, a very simple visual figure: the straight line. Though common in today’s man-made world, straight-lines are rare in nature, so their meaning would be much different to, say, a cave painter, whose only common experiences with them might be in tree trunks and the flat line of the horizon.
Color is another example.
Our immediate surroundings are literally saturated with thousands of colors, but think about how different the world of color would be to an artist in an ancient forest and one in the desert.
How very different must the concept of “greenness” be for each, one surrounded by it constantly, the other viewing it only rarely. Consider tales of certain Amazon tribes, raised in such thick jungle that their visual world was at all times limited to objects a few feet in front of them.
When taken out onto the plains and shown mountains for the first time, such tribesmen became disoriented and could not understand why they could not reach out and touch them.
As difficult as it may have been for them to appreciate our visual world, it would be equally difficult for us to appreciate theirs.
These differences obviously extend to more complex visual forms, and, in some cases, we can only speculate about the metaphorical meanings of the figures in ancient artwork.
We must always keep in mind that art strives not only to depict, but also to evoke, and, as such, our understanding is always limited by our knowledge of the artist’s time and place.

While my mother's parents spent their lives in New York, my paternal grandparents were born and raised in neighboring villages of Austria.
My grandfather's father owned a liquor store and was very religious.
My grandfather was the academic of the family.
He completed high school, college and graduate degrees.
He worked as a teacher and principal, much more respected positions then than now.
I connected deeply with this grandfather, Herman.
He and I are sensitive, loving, prone to worry, and innately talented teachers.
Though my grandparents and great-grandparents were born in Austria, I am not Austrian.
This, I believe, is the case for many Jews in the United States.
Belonging to this religion is a cultural heritage as well as a faith.
Though I rarely think of myself as Jewish and pay small heed to the holidays, Judaism is a large part of my identity.

But man is not destined to vanish.
He can be killed, but he cannot be destroyed, because his soul is deathless and his spirit is irrepressible.
Therefore, though the situation seems dark in the context of the confrontation between the superpowers, the silver lining is provided by amazing phenomenon that the very nations which have spent incalculable resources and energy for the production of deadly weapons are desperately trying to find out how they might never be used.
They threaten each other, intimidate each other and go to the brink, but before the total hour arrives they withdraw from the brink.

Doña Teodora offered me yet another cup of strong, black coffee.
The aroma of the big, paper-thin Sonoran tortillas filled the small, linoleum-covered kitchen, and I knew that with the coffee I would receive a buttered tortilla straight from the round, homemade comal (a flat, earthen-ware cooking pan) balanced on the gas-burning stove.
For three days, from ten in the morning until early evening, I had been sitting in the same comfortable wooden chair, taking cup after cup of black coffee and consuming hot tortillas.
Doña Teodora was ninety years old, and although she would take occasional breaks from patting, extending, and turning over tortillas to let her cat in or out, it appeared that I was the only one exhausted at the end of the day.
But once out, as I went over the notes, filed and organized the tape cassettes, exhilaration would set in.
The intellectual and emotional excitement I had previously experienced when a pertinent document would suddenly appear now waned in comparison to the gestures and words, the joy and anger doña Teodora offered.
She had not written down her thoughts; but the ideas, recollections, and images evoked by her lively oral expression were jewels for anyone who wanted to know about the life of Mexicanas * in booming mining towns on both sides of the Mexico-United States border in the early twentieth century.
She never kept a diary.
The thought of writing a memoir would have been put aside as presumptuous.
But all her life doña Teodora had lived amidst the telling and retelling of family stories.
Genealogies of her own family as well as complete and up-to-date information of the marriages, births, and deaths of numerous families that made up her community were all well-kept memories.
These chains of generations were fleshed out with recollections of the many events and tribulations of these families.
Oral history had proven to be a fertile field for my research on the history of Mexicanas.
My search had begun in libraries and archives—repositories of conventional history.
The available sources were to be found in census reports, church records, directories, and other such statistical information.
These, however, as important as they are, cannot provide one of the essential dimensions of history, the full narrative of the human experience that defies quantification and classification.
In certain social groups this gap can be filled with diaries, memoirs, letters, or even reports from others.
In the case of Mexicanas in the United States, one of the many devastating consequences of defeat and conquest has been that the traditional institutions that preserve and transfer culture (the documentation of the past) have ignored these personal written sources.
The letters, writings, and documents of Mexican people have rarely, if ever, been included in archives, special collections, or libraries.
At best, some centers have attempted to collect newspapers published by Mexicans, but the effort was started late.
The historian who tries to reconstruct the past from newspapers is constantly frustrated because, although titles abound, collections are scarce and often incomplete.
Although many hours of previous study and preparation had taken me to doña Teodora's kitchen, I was initially unsure of my place.
Was I really an insider or were the experiences that had made the lives of my interviewees such that, although I could speak Spanish and am Mexicana, I was still an outsider?
I realized, nonetheless, that the richness and depth of the spoken word challenges the comforting theories and models of the social sciences.
Mexican history challenges social-science models derived solely from victorious imperialistic experiences.
Our history cannot be written without new sources.
These sources will determine which concepts are needed to illuminate and interpret the past, and these concepts will emerge from the people themselves.
This will permit the description of events and structures to assume a culturally relevant perspective, thus emphasizing the point of view of
the Mexican people.
The use of theoretical constructs must follow the voices of the people who live the reality, consciously or not.
For too long the experiences of women have been studied according to male-oriented sources and constructs.
These must be questioned.
For the history of Mexican people, the sources primarily exist in our own worlds.
And it is here where we must begin.
I often found that as the memory awakened, other sources would emerge.
Boxes of letters, photographs, and even manuscripts and diaries would appear.
Long-standing assumptions of illiteracy were shattered and had to be reexamined.
I saw that constant reevaluation became the rule rather than the exception.
I entered women's worlds created on the margin —not only of Anglo life, but of, and outside of, the lives of their own fathers, husbands, sons, brothers, or priests, bosses, and bureaucrats.

In her introduction to the first Omnibus of Crime, Dorothy Sayers wrote that the detective story “does not, and by hypothesis never can, attain the loftiest level of literary achievement.”
And she suggested somewhere else that this is because it is a “literature of escape” and not “a literature of expression.”
I do not know what the loftiest level of literary achievement is; neither did Aeschylus or Shakespeare; neither did Miss Sayers.
Other things being equal, which they never are, books with a more powerful theme will provoke a more powerful performance.
Yet some very dull books have been written about God, and some very fine ones about how to make a living and stay fairly honest.
It is always a matter of who writes the stuff, and what the individual has to write it with.
As for literature of expression and literature of escape, this is critics’ jargon, a use of abstract words as if they had absolute meanings.
Everything written with vitality expresses that vitality; there are no dull subjects, only dull minds.
All people who read escape from something else into what lies behind the printed page; the quality of the dream may be argued, but its release has become a functional necessity.
All people must escape at times from the deadly rhythm of their private thoughts.
It is part of the process of life among thinking beings.
It is one of the things that distinguish them from the three-toed sloth.
I hold no particular brief for the detective story as the ideal escape.
I merely say that all reading for pleasure is escape, whether it be Greek or The Diary of the Forgotten Man.
To say otherwise is to be an intellectual snob, and a juvenile at the art of living.
I think that what was really gnawing at Dorothy Sayers’ mind was the realization that her kind of detective story was an arid formula that could not even satisfy its own implications.
It was second-rate literature because it was not about the things that could make first-rate literature.
If it started out to be about real people (and she could write about them—her minor characters show that), they must very soon do unreal things in order to conform to the artificial pattern required by the plot.
When they did unreal things, they ceased to be real themselves.
They became puppets and cardboard lovers and papier-mâché villains and detectives of exquisite and impossible gentility.
The only kind of writer who could be happy with these properties was the one who did not know what reality was.
Dorothy Sayers’ own stories show that she was annoyed by this triteness: the weakest element in them is the part that makes them detective stories, the strongest the part that could be removed without touching the “problem of logic and deduction.”
Yet she could not or would not give her characters their heads and let them make their own mystery.

Over the course of millions of years, humans throughout the world have built up a knowledge of their local natural environment so extensive that not even professional biologists can hope to capture more than a small fraction of it, and other members of urban and industrialized societies can scarcely imagine it.
At the end of the twenty-four days that I spent with the Ketengban people of New Guinea, I felt like a narrow-minded boor because I had so often nudged the subject back to birds when they began to talk of anything else.
Even for very rare bird species, such as New Guinea’s leaden honeyeater and garnet robin, the Ketengbans rattled off the altitudes at which the birds lived, the other species with which they associated, the height above the ground at which they foraged, their diet, adult call, juvenile call, seasonal movements, and so on.
Only by cutting short the Ketengbans’ attempts to share with me their equally detailed knowledge of local plant, rat, and frog species could I record even fragments of their knowledge of birds in twenty-four days.
Traditionally, the Ketengbans acquired this knowledge by spending much of their time in the forest, from childhood on.
When I asked my guide, Robert Uropka, how, lacking binoculars and the sight of one eye, he had come to know so much about a tiny, dullplumed warbler species that lives in the treetops, he told me that as children he and his playmates used to climb trees, build blinds in the canopy, and observe and hunt up there.
But all that is changing, he explained, as he pointed to his eight-year-old son.
Children go to school now, and only at vacation times can they live in the forest.
The results, as I have seen elsewhere in New Guinea, are adult New Guineans who know scarcely more about birds than do most American city dwellers.
Compounding this problem, education throughout Indonesian New Guinea is in the Indonesian national language, not in Ketengban and the 300 other indigenous languages.
Radio, TV, newspapers, commerce, and government also use the Indonesian national language.
While the reasoning behind such decisions is, of course, understandable, the outcome is that all but 200 of the modern world’s 6,000 languages are likely to be extinct or moribund by the end of the next century.
As humanity’s linguistic heritage disintegrates, much of our traditional, mostly unrecorded knowledge base vanishes with it.
The analogy that occurs to me is the final destruction, in 391 A.D., of the largest library of the ancient world, at Alexandria.
The library housed all the literature of Greece, plus much literature of other cultures, most of which, as a result of that library’s burning, was lost to later generations.
The ongoing loss today that draws most public attention is the loss of biodiversity; that is, the loss of variety in nature.
In that loss, nature is viewed as the victim, humans as the villains.
But there is also a parallel loss in which humans are both victims and unwitting villains.
Not only are species going extinct, but so is much of our information about those species that survive.
In the future, no children will grow up in the forest, where they could receive or rediscover that knowledge.
Certainly, professional biologists don’t have the necessary time—I count myself lucky if I can spend one month every year or two in New Guinea.
It is as if we are burning most of our books, while the languages of those books that remain become as lost to us as the texts written 3,000 years ago in ancient Crete in what is the still-undecipherable ancient Greek script.

Grown people know that they do not always know the why of things, and even if they think they know, they do not know where and how they got the proof.
Hence the irritation they show when children keep on demanding to know if a thing is so and how the grown folks got the proof of it.
It is so troublesome because it is disturbing to the pigeonhole way of life.
It is upsetting because until the elders are pushed for an answer, they have never looked to see if it was so, nor how they came by what passes for proof to their acceptances of certain things as true.
So, if telling their questioning young to run off and play does not suffice for an answer, a good swat on the child’s bottom is held to be proof positive for anything from spelling “Constantinople” to why the sea is salt.
It was told to the old folks and that had been enough for them, or to put it in Black idiom, nobody didn’t tell ‘em, but they heard.
So there must be something wrong with a child that questions the gods of the pigeonhole.
I was always asking and making myself a crow in a pigeon’s nest.
It was hard on my family and surroundings, and they in turn were hard on me.
I did not know then, as I know now, that people are prone to build a statue of the kind of person that it pleases them to be.
And few people want to be forced to ask themselves, “What if there is no me like my statue?”
The thing to do is to grab the broom of anger and drive off the beast of fear.
I was full of curiosity like many other children, and like them I was as unconscious of the sanctity of statuary as a flock of pigeons around a palace.
I got few answers from other people, but I kept on asking, because I couldn’t do anything else with my feelings.
Naturally, I felt like other children in that death, destruction, and other agonies were never meant to touch me.
Things like that happened to other people, and no wonder.
They were not like me and mine.
Naturally, the world and the firmaments careened to one side a little so as not to inconvenience me.
In fact, the universe went further than that—it was happy to break a few rules just to show me preferences.
For instance, for a long time I gloated over the happy secret that when I played outdoors in the moonlight the moon followed me, whichever way I ran.
The moon was so happy when I came out to play that it ran shining and shouting after me like a pretty puppy dog.
The other children didn’t count.
But, I was rudely shaken out of this when I confided my happy secret to Carrie Roberts, my chum.
It was cruel.
She not only scorned my claim, she said that the moon was paying me no mind at all.
The moon, my own happy privateplaying moon, was out in its play yard to race and play with her.
We disputed the matter with hot jealousy, and nothing would do but we must run a race to prove which one the moon was loving.
First, we both ran a race side by side, but that proved nothing because we both contended that the moon was going that way on account of us.
I just knew that the moon was there to be with me, but Carrie kept on saying that it was herself that the moon preferred.
So then it came to me that we ought to run in opposite directions so that Carrie could come to her senses and realize the moon was mine.
So we both stood with our backs to our gate, counted three, and tore out in opposite directions.
“Look! Look, Carrie!” I cried exultantly.
“You see the moon is following me!”
“Ah, youse a tale-teller! You know it’s chasing me.”
So Carrie and I parted company, mad as we could be with each other.
When the other children found out what the quarrel was about, they laughed it off.
They told me the moon always followed them.
The unfaithfulness of the moon hurt me deeply.
My moon followed Carrie Roberts.
My moon followed Matilda Clark and Julia Mosley, and Oscar and Teedy Miller.
But after a while, I ceased to ache over the moon’s many loves.
I found comfort in the fact that though I was not the moon’s exclusive friend, I was still among those who showed the moon which way to go.
That was my earliest conscious hint that the world didn’t tilt under my footfalls, nor careen over one-sided just to make me glad.
But no matter whether my probings made me happier or sadder, I kept on probing to know.

In 1846, when the three Bronte sisters, hoping for publication, sent their verses to Messrs.
Aylott and Jones, they adopted masculine pseudonyms, calling themselves Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell.
Strictly speaking, this masculine disguise was unnecessary: in England, women writers had been published since the 1670s, when the novelist and playwright Aphra Behn became the first woman to earn a living with her pen.
The Brontes, however, knew the prejudice they would face, were they to publish under their own names.
Even Robert Southey, then Poet Laureate of England, shared this common prejudice, writing to Charlotte Bronte, “Literature cannot be the business of a woman’s life, and it ought not to be.”

A year after he had come to live with them Mr. and Mrs. Moreen suddenly gave up the villa at Nice.
Pemberton had got used to suddenness, having seen it practiced on a considerable scale during two jerky little tours—one in Switzerland the first summer, and the other late in the winter, when they all ran down to Florence and then, at the end of ten days, liking it much less than they had intended, straggled back in mysterious depression.
They had returned to Nice “for ever,” as they said; but this didn’t prevent their squeezing, one rainy muggy May night, into a second-class railway-carriage—you could never tell by which class they would travel—where Pemberton helped them to stow away a wonderful collection of bundles and bags.
The explanation of this manoeuvre was that they had determined to spend the summer “in some bracing place”; but in Paris they dropped into a small furnished apartment—a fourth floor in a third-rate avenue, where there was a smell on the staircase and the portier was hateful—and passed the next four months in blank indigence.
The better part of this forced temporary stay belonged to the tutor and his pupil, who, visiting the Invalides2 and Notre Dame, the Conciergerie and all the museums, took a hundred rewarding rambles.
They learned to know their Paris, which was useful, for they came back another year for a longer stay, the general character of which in Pemberton’s memory today mixes pitiably and confusedly with that of the first.
He sees Morgan’s shabby knickerbockers—the everlasting pair that didn’t match his blouse and that as he grew longer could only grow faded.
He remembers the particular holes in his three or four pairs of colored stockings.
Morgan was dear to his mother, but he never was better dressed than was absolutely necessary—partly, no doubt, by his own fault, for he was as indifferent to his appearance as a German philosopher.
“My dear fellow, so are you! I don’t want to cast you in the shade.”
Pemberton could have no rejoinder for this—the assertion so closely represented the fact.
If however the deficiencies of his own wardrobe were a chapter by themselves he didn’t like his little charge to look too poor.
Later he used to say “Well, if we’re poor, why, after all, shouldn’t we look it?” and he consoled himself with thinking there was something rather elderly and gentlemanly in Morgan’s disrepair—it differed from the untidiness of the urchin who plays and spoils his things.
He could trace perfectly the degrees by which, in proportion as her little son confined himself to his tutor for society, Mrs. Moreen shrewdly forbore to renew his garments.
She did nothing that didn’t show, neglected him because he escaped notice, and then, as he illustrated this clever policy, discouraged at home his public appearances.
Her position was logical enough—those members of her family who did show had to be showy.
During this period and several others Pemberton was quite aware of how he and his comrade might strike people; wandering languidly through the Jardin des Plantes3 as if they had nowhere to go, sitting on the winter days in the galleries of the Louvre, so splendidly ironical to the homeless, as if for the advantage of the steam radiators.
They joked about it sometimes: it was the sort of joke that was perfectly within the boy’s compass.
They figured themselves as part of the vast vague hand-to-mouth multitude of the enormous city and pretended they were proud of their  position in it—it showed them “such a lot of life” and made them conscious of a democratic brotherhood.
If Pemberton couldn’t feel a sympathy in destitution with his small companion—for after all Morgan’s fond parents would never have let him really suffer—the boy would at least feel it with him, so it came to the same thing.
He used sometimes to wonder what people would think they were—to fancy they were looked askance at, as if it might be a suspected case of kidnapping.
Morgan wouldn’t be taken for a young patrician with a tutor—he wasn’t smart enough—though he might pass for his companion’s sickly little brother.
Now and then he had a five-franc piece, and except once, when they bought a couple of lovely neckties, one of which he made Pemberton accept, they laid it out scientifically in old books.
This was sure to be a great day, always spent at the used book stands on the quays, in a rummage of the dusty boxes that garnish the parapets.
Such occasions helped them to live, for their books ran low very soon after the beginning of their acquaintance.
Pemberton had a good many in England, but he was obliged to write to a friend and ask him kindly to get some fellow to give him something for them.

Should a novelist be allowed to take liberties with the lives of historical figures?
This question has engaged critics for centuries, with some supporting the cause of historical accuracy and others weighing in on the side of artistic freedom.
There is, to my mind, a difference between Daniel Defoe’s use of the story of Alexander Selkirk, who endured four years as a castaway, to create his character Robinson Crusoe, and Doctorow’s wholesale appropriation of historical personages such as Booker T. Washington and Emma Goldman, whose fame or notoriety he capitalizes on as he makes them “interact” with his fictional characters.

Savages we call them, because their manners differ from ours, which we think the perfection of civility; they think the same of theirs.
Perhaps, if we could examine the manners of different nations with impartiality, we should find no people so rude as to be without rules of politeness, nor any so polite as not to have some remains of rudeness.
The Indian men, when young, are hunters and warriors; when old, counselors, for all their government is by counsel of the sages; there is no force, there are no prisons, no officers to compel obedience or inflict punishment.
ence they generally study oratory, the best speaker having the most influence.
The Indian women till the ground, dress the food, nurse and bring up the children, and preserve and hand down to posterity the memory of public transactions.
These employments of men and women are accounted natural and honorable.
Having few artificial wants, they have abundance of leisure for improvement by conversation.
Our laborious manner of life, compared with theirs, they esteem slavish and base; and the learning, on which we value ourselves, they regard as frivolous and useless.
An instance of this occurred at the treaty of Lancaster, in Pennsylvania, in the year 1744, between the government of Virginia and the Six Nations.
After the principal business was settled, the commissioners from Virginia acquainted the Indians by a speech that there was at Williamsburg a college, with a fund for educating Indian youth; and that, if the Six Nations would send down half a dozen of their young lads to that college, the government would take care that they should be well provided for, and instructed in all the learning of the white people.
It is one of the Indian rules of politeness not to answer a public proposition the same day that it is made; they think that it would be treating it as a light matter, and that they show it respect by taking time to consider it, as of a matter important.
They therefore deferred their answer till the day following; when their speaker began by expressing their deep sense of the kindness of the Virginia government in making them that offer, saying: “We know that you highly esteem the kind of learning taught in those colleges, and that the maintenance of our young men, while with you, would be very expensive to you.
We are convinced, therefore, that you mean to do us good by your proposal, and we thank you heartily.
But you, who are wise, must know that different nations have different conceptions of things; and you will therefore not take it amiss, if our ideas of this kind of education happen not to be the same as yours.
We have had some experience of it.
Several of our young people were formerly brought up at the colleges of the northern provinces: they were instructed in all your sciences; but when they came back to us they were bad runners, ignorant of every means of living in the woods, unable to bear cold or hunger.
They knew neither how to build a cabin, take a deer, nor kill an enemy, spoke our language imperfectly, were therefore neither fit for hunters, warriors, nor counselors; they were totally good for nothing.
We are, however, not the less obliged by your kind offer, though we decline accepting it; and, to show our grateful sense of it, if the gentlemen of Virginia will send us a dozen of their sons, we will take care of their education, instruct them in all we know, and make men of them.”

Strangely enough, among the high points of the Jewish Museum’s exhibition entitled Wild Things: The Art of Maurice Sendak, is a small alcove off the main gallery.
Decked out with soft pillows, a shaggy rug, and a generous assortment of Sendak books, this retreat from the museum’s crowds was inspired by Max’s imaginary bedroom in Where the Wild Things Are, perhaps Sendak’s most famous children’s tale.
Walking through the exhibit’s thematically arranged rooms, exploring the artist’s Eastern European roots, his connections to Brooklyn’s Jewish community, and his links to Germany, land of the Holocaust and of the brothers Grimm, I was increasingly drawn to this simple room where a weary mother could read to her sleepy child.

For the qualities that distinguish great conductors lie far beyond and above what we have spoken of.
We now begin to deal with the intangibles, the deep magical aspect of conducting.
It is the mystery of relationships—conductor and orchestra bound together by the tiny but powerful split second.
How can I describe to you the magic of the moment of beginning a piece of music?
There is only one possible fraction of a second that feels exactly right for starting.
There is a wait while the orchestra readies itself and collects its powers; while the conductor concentrates his whole will and force toward the work in hand; while the audience quiets down, and the last cough has died away.
There is no slight rustle of a program book; the instruments are poised and—bang!
That’s it.
One second later, it is too late, and the magic has vanished.
This psychological timing is constantly in play throughout the performance of music.
It means that a great conductor is one who has great sensitivity to the flow of time; who makes one note move to the next in exactly the right way and at the right instant.
For music, as we said, exists in the medium of time.
It is time itself that must be carved up, molded and remolded until it becomes, like a statue, an existing shape and form.
This is the hardest to do.
For a symphony is not like a statue, which can be viewed all at once, or bit by bit at leisure, in one’s own chosen time.
With music, we are trapped in time.
Each note is gone as soon as it has sounded, and it never can be recontemplated or heard again at the particular instant of rightness.
It is always too late for a second look.
So the conductor is a kind of sculptor whose element is time instead of marble; and in sculpting it, he must have a superior sense of proportion and relationship.
He must judge the largest rhythms, the whole phraseology of a work.
He must conquer the form of a piece not only in the sense of form as a mold, but form in its deepest sense, knowing and controlling where the music relaxes, where it begins to accumulate tension, where the greatest tension is reached, where it must ease up to gather strength for the next lap, where it unloads that strength.
These are the intangibles of conducting, the mysteries that no conductor can learn or acquire.
If he has a natural faculty for deep perception, it will increase and deepen as he matures.
If he hasn’t, he will always be a pretty good conductor.
But even the pretty good conductor must have one more attribute in his personality, without which all the mechanics and knowledge and perception are useless; and that is the power to communicate all this to his orchestra—through his arms, face, eyes, fingers, and whatever vibrations may flow from him.
If he uses a baton, the baton itself must be a living thing, charged with a kind of electricity, which makes it an instrument of meaning in its tiniest movement.
If he does not use a baton, his hands must do the job with equal clarity.
But baton or no baton, his gestures must be first and always meaningful in terms of the music.
The chief element in the conductor’s technique of communication is the preparation.
Everything must be shown to the orchestra before it happens.
Once the player is playing the note, it is too late.
So the conductor always has to be a beat or two ahead of the orchestra . . . .
And he must hear two things at the same time: what the players are doing at any moment, and what they are about to do a moment later.
Therefore, the basic trick is in the preparatory upbeat.
If our conductor is back again on page one of Brahms’s First Symphony, he must show, in his silent upbeat, the character of the music which is about to sound.
Whether he thinks of it as tense and agitated, or weighty and doom-ridden, his upbeat should show this, in order to enable the orchestra players to respond in kind.
It is exactly like breathing: the preparation is like an inhalation, and the music sounds as an exhalation.
We all have to inhale in order to speak, for example; all verbal expression is exhaled.
So it is with music: we inhale on the upbeat and sing out a phrase of music, then inhale again and breathe out the next phrase.
A conductor who breathes with the music has gone far in acquiring a technique.
But the conductor must not only make his orchestra play; he must make them want to play.
He must exalt them, lift them, start their adrenaline pouring, either through cajoling or demanding or raging.
But however he does it, he must make the orchestra love the music as he loves it.
It is not so much imposing his will on them like a dictator; it is more like projecting his feelings around him so that they reach the last player in the second violin section.
And when this happens—when one hundred players share his feelings, exactly, simultaneously, responding as one to each rise and fall of the music, to each point of arrival and departure, to each little inner pulse—then there is a human identity of feeling that has no equal elsewhere.
It is the closest thing I know to love itself.
On this current of love the conductor can communicate at the deepest levels with his players, and ultimately with his audience.
He may shout and rant and curse and insult his players at rehearsal—as some of our greatest conductors are famous for doing—but if there is this love, the conductor and his orchestra will remain knit together through it all and function as one.
Well, there is our ideal conductor.
And perhaps the chief requirement of all this is that he be humble before the composer; that he never interpose himself between the music and the audience; that all his efforts, however strenuous or glamorous, be made in the service of the composer’s meaning—the music itself, which, after all, is the whole reason for the conductor’s existence.

It was the Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in November, before the first of the persons with whom this history has business.
The Dover road lay, as to him, beyond the Dover mail, as it lumbered up Shooter’s Hill.
He walked uphill in the mire by the side of the mail, as the rest of the passengers did; not because they had the least relish for walking exercise, under the circumstances, but because the hill, and the harness, and the mud, and the mail, were all so heavy, that the horses had three times already come to a stop, besides once drawing the coach across the road, with the mutinous intent of taking it back to Blackheath.
With drooping heads and tremulous tails, the horses mashed their way through the thick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles as if they were falling to pieces at the larger joints.
As often as the driver rested them and brought them to a stand, with a wary “Woho! so-ho then!” the near leader violently shook his head and everything upon it—like an unusually emphatic horse, denying that the coach could be got up the hill.
Whenever the leader made this rattle, the passenger started, as a nervous passenger might, and was disturbed in mind.
There was a steaming mist in all the hollows, and it had roamed in its forlornness up the hill, like an evil spirit, seeking rest and finding none.
A clammy and intensely cold mist, it made its slow way through the air in ripples that visibly followed and overspread one another, as the waves of an unwholesome sea might do.
It was dense enough to shut out everything from the light of the coachlamps but these its own workings, and a few yards of road; and the reek of the laboring horses steamed into it, as if they had made it all.
Two other passengers, besides the one, were plodding up the hill by the side of the mail.
All three were wrapped to the cheekbones and over the ears, and wore jack-boots.
Not one of the three could have said, from anything he saw, what either of the other two was like; and each was hidden under almost as many wrappers from the eyes of the mind, as from the eyes of the body, of his two companions.
In those days, travelers were very shy of being confidential on a short notice, for anyone on the road might be a robber or in league with robbers.
As to the latter, when every posting-house and ale-house could produce somebody in “the Captain’s” pay, ranging from the landlord to the lowest stable nondescript, it was the likeliest thing upon the cards.
So the guard of the Dover mail thought to himself, that Friday night in November, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, lumbering up Shooter’s Hill, as he stood on his own particular perch behind the mail, beating his feet, and keeping an eye and a hand on the arm-chest before him, where a loaded blunderbuss lay at the top of six or eight loaded horse-pistols, deposited on a substratum of cutlass.
The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guard suspected the passengers, the passengers suspected one another and the guard, they all suspected everybody else, and the coachman was sure of nothing but the horses; as to which cattle he could with a clear conscience have taken his oath on the two Testaments that they were not fit for the journey.

On receiving the Congressional Medal for Distinguished Civilian Achievement, Dr.
Jonas Salk declared, “I feel that the greatest reward for doing is the opportunity to do more.”
People worldwide would agree that, in his forty-year medical career, Salk did a stunning amount for humanity.
His work developing the first polio vaccine was the opening shot in a war that has led to the disease’s virtual eradication.
(In 2001, polio, which once paralyzed hundreds of thousands of children annually, claimed only 600 new victims worldwide.)
Though Salk’s vaccine has been superseded by Albert Sabin’s cheaper oral vaccine, Salk’s legacy and name live on.

If he wasn’t a myth maker himself, at least Clement Clarke Moore was a great myth refiner.
He started with St. Nicholas, giver of presents, whom the Dutch settlers had brought over to New York.
Moore’s portrait of the good saint is as fleshy and real as some Frans Hals painting of a burgher: The stump of a pipe he held tight in his
teeth, And the smoke it encircled his head like a wreath.
But with American efficiency, Moore combines the figure of St. Nicholas with that of Kris Kringle, who (in Norwegian lore) helped the saint by driving a reindeer-drawn sleigh.
Moore fires Kris, leaving St. Nick to do his own driving.
The result is our own American Santa Claus.
Moore removes St. Nick’s bishop’s miter, decks him out in fur, gives him a ruddy face and a pot belly, hands him a sack of toys and calls him an elf—suggesting a pointed cap.
Thomas Nast, our most authoritative Santa Claus delineator, stuck closely to Moore’s description, and ever since, few artists have dared depart from it.
To see how good Moore’s imagination is, you have only to compare his version of St. Nicholas with Washington Irving’s of a few years earlier.
In 1809, in “Knickerbocker’s History of New York,” Irving makes St. Nick a friendly Dutch-American deity “riding jollily among the tree-tops” in (of all things) a wagon, not only on Christmas but also on any old holiday afternoon.
What pulled that silly wagon Irving doesn’t say, or why it didn’t snag itself on a branch and bust both axles.
But Moore in his genius provides St. Nick with reindeer power.
And by laying marvelous names on those obedient steeds, he makes each one an individual.
Though ruminants may be poorly designed for flight, Moore doesn’t worry his head about aerodynamics; he just sidesteps the whole problem.
Dasher, Dancer, Prancer, and the rest of the crew simply whiz up to the rooftop by pure magic.
It never occurs to us to question such a feat.
We are one with Moore’s protagonist, a man with “wondering eyes.”
Delving into John Hollander’s recent Library of America anthology “American Poetry: The Nineteenth Century,” I was glad to find “A Visit From St. Nicholas” right there along with works by Whitman, Emily Dickinson and Jones Very.
Professional deconstructionists may sneer, but popular demand has fixed the poem securely in our national heritage.
If Mr. Hollander had left it out, it would have been missed.
Statistics are scarce, but it seems likely that Moore’s masterwork has been reprinted, recited and learned by heart more often than any other American poem—and that goes for “The Raven,” “Casey at the Bat,” and Sylvia Plath’s “Daddy.”
To be sure, mere popularity doesn’t make a work of art great.
If it did, then “September Morn,” that delicate tribute to skinny-dipping once reproduced on calendars hung in barbershops and pool halls galore, would be a better painting than “Nude Descending a Staircase” any day.
And yet a poem like Moore’s that has stuck around for 171 years has to have something going for it.
Well then, what?
I submit that the poem’s immortality may be due not only to Moore’s perfecting a great myth, but also to his skill in music-making.
It is a moribund reader who doesn’t feel the spell of its bounding anapests, as hard to ignore as a herd of reindeer on your roof.
Poets today tend to shy away from such obvious rhythms.
They shrink too from alliteration, which, applied badly, seems bric-a-brac.
But Moore lays it on thick, and makes it work like a charm: the “fl” sounds in “Away to the window I flew like a flash,” the hard “c” sounds in “More rapid than eagles his coursers they came.”
As for his rhymes, most clunk along unsurprisingly (like “house” and “mouse”), but a few sound Muse-inspired.
If any later versifier ever hits upon another pair of rhyming words as fresh and precise as these, let him die smug: He sprang to his sleigh, to his team gave a whistle, And away they all flew like the down of a thistle.
History doesn’t tell us whether Moore’s daughters, who first received the poem as a Christmas present in 1822, were disappointed at not getting dolls instead.
Anyhow, it is a safe bet that, a hundred years from now, many a more serious and respectable poem will have departed from human memory like the down of a thistle, while Moore’s vision of that wonderful eight-deer sleigh will go thundering on.
“A Visit From St. Nicholas” may be only a sweet confection, yet how well it lasts.
On a cold winter night, it can warm you to the quick: a homemade verbal cookie dipped in Ovaltine.

The African elephant—mythic symbol of a continent, keystone of its ecology and the largest land animal remaining on earth—has become the object of one of the biggest, broadest international efforts yet mounted to turn a threatened species off the road to extinction.
But it is not only the elephant’s survival that is at stake, conservationists say.
Unlike the endangered tiger, unlike even the great whales, the African elephant is in great measure the architect of its environment.
As a voracious eater of vegetation, it largely shapes the forest-and-savanna surroundings in which it lives, thereby setting the terms of existence for millions of other storied animals—from zebras to gazelles to giraffes and wildebeests—that share its habitat.
And as the elephant disappears, scientists and conservationists say, many other species will also disappear from vast stretches of forest and savanna, drastically altering and impoverishing whole ecosystems.
It is the elephant’s metabolism and appetite that make it a disturber of the environment and therefore an important creator of habitat.
In a constant search for the 300 pounds of vegetation it must have every day, it kills small trees and underbrush and pulls branches off big trees as high as its trunk will reach.
This creates innumerable open spaces in both deep tropical forests and in the woodlands that cover part of the African savannas.
The resulting patchwork, a mosaic of vegetation in various stages of regeneration, in turn creates a greater variety of forage that attracts a greater variety of other vegetation-eaters than would otherwise be the case.
In studies over the last twenty years in southern Kenya near Mount Kilimanjaro, Dr. David Western has found that when elephants are allowed to roam the savannas naturally and normally, they spread out at “intermediate densities.”
Their foraging creates a mixture of savanna woodlands (what the Africans call bush) and grassland.
The result is a highly diverse array of other plant-eating species: those like the zebra, wildebeest and gazelle, that graze; those like the giraffe, bushbuck and lesser kudu, that browse on tender shoots, buds, twigs and leaves; and plant-eating primates like the baboon and vervet monkey.
These herbivores attract carnivores like the lion and cheetah.
When the elephant population thins out, Dr. Western said, the woodlands become denser and the grazers are squeezed out.
When pressure from poachers forces elephants to crowd more densely onto reservations, the woodlands there are knocked out and the browsers and primates disappear.
Something similar appears to happen in dense tropical rain forests.
In their natural state, because the overhead forest canopy shuts out sunlight and prevents growth on the forest floor, rain forests provide slim pickings for large, hoofed plant-eaters.
By pulling down trees and eating new growth, elephants enlarge natural openings in the canopy, allowing plants to regenerate on the forest floor and bringing down vegetation from the canopy so that smaller species can get at it.
In such situations, the rain forest becomes hospitable to large plant-eating mammal such as bongos, bush pigs, duikers, forest hogs, swamp antelopes, forest buffaloes, okapis, sometimes gorillas and always a host of smaller animals that thrive on secondary growth.
When elephants disappear and the forest reverts, the larger animals give way to smaller, nimbler animals like monkeys, squirrels and rodents.

He was good-looking, in a Southern, romantic poet sort of way.
He needed those good looks, one of the aunts said; why else would my otherwise sensible mother have married a man like him, an actor-writer hyphenate who lived on dreams and spent his free evenings carrying a spear at the Opera House.
But that was in later times, when he had moved out of the rundown communal house in the Berkeley Hills, leaving my mother and the ever-changing cast of nominal uncles and aunts to patch the ancient water heater and pump out the basement when the overpressured valve finally blew.
He needed separateness to write, he said, solitude, something we’d never given him, and he was tired, tired of being dragged from his study to tend to the latest household eruption that bubbled up “like gas from a Calistoga mud bath,” he said, with relentless regularity.
He looked tired by then, as tired of us as we were of him, of forgotten birthdays and surprises that failed to surprise.
When he did bring us a present, I even wondered why, for it was always somehow off: last season’s hot toy no one played with any more, or a complicated model no boy could assemble without a father’s help.
Which we never got.
He was an actor, after all, not tech crew, an artist, not someone who could fix a toy.
If he was an actor, we were props at best.
Reluctant ones—had there been a Plantagenet Pleasure Faire, he would have strutted his hour as Wicked Dick III, while Geoffrey and I, thrust into burlap sacks, were hauled off, two little princes in shabby tights, to be disposed of elsewhere.
That was his glory, kinging it.
Living History, he called it, and in the early days he followed the fairs up and down the state, living the Renaissance first in Agoura, then in Marin, finally winding up the acting season with Victoria’s England in San Francisco or even Oakland for one or two slow years.
Not that anyone ever hired him to act the king.
No, he was a minor figure even on that rude stage, a charming but lesser nobleman in Elizabeth’s court, an attentive councilor in Victoria’s entourage.
But he shared the perks of royalty, such as they were, stood center stage in black velvet pantaloons while the September sun burned overhead, or posed handsomely (in a Prince Albert coat, no less) as the royal party made its way through the Christmas crowds at Dickens Fair.
Why he stuck to it, I never understood.
Certainly not for the pay.
Between fairs he wrote, or thought of writing, shut up in his study, into which we children were not allowed, or did research for his one-man-shows (in which he played a series of writers, one per show, so that one year we saw his Edgar Allan Poe, another year, his Ambrose Bierce).
He was a writer, or at least a writer once removed, writing down other men’s words and speaking them as if they were his own.
At times it seemed he thought they were his own, he paraphrased them so freely, vamping upon the themes of The Devil’s Dictionary.
And he probably thought we were his own as well, as little acquainted with us as he was.
And so we were, if only by example and heredity.

There was an empty room at the top of our house and on the wall, between the fireplace and the window, almost hidden in the gloom, hung a small portrait in oils.
Dim and yellowed by time, that picture showed the head of a man of strange appearance, for he had long hair and below his pointed bear was some kind of wide collar brim.
His face was melancholy and yet it always seemed to me that there was a sneer upon those bearded lips.
Children rarely look up when they are playing with toys on the floor, for they are too busy with their own imaginings, but one day, when I had strayed into that vacant room and was amusing myself, I happened to glance toward the portrait and saw, to my astonishment, that the eyes of the man were watching me.
I turned away, then looked up, and once more his eyes met mine.
I got to my feet and, as I did so, those eyes turned to watch every movement I made.
I backed toward the door and that look still followed me, half-mournful, half-accusing.
I did not tell anyone what had happened, but I did not venture into the room again for more than a few seconds at a time, except when I was with grown-ups.
Emboldened by their company, I learned to play a fearful but exciting game.
I moved slowly here and there about the room, pretending not to look, I talked with my elders, then swung around sharply.
I was still being watched.s
The searching gaze was always the same, so melancholy and accusing that I began to feel a sense of guilt, began to wonder what evil I could have committed.
Guilt and fear mingled in my mind and I was certain that the stranger was treacherous, that his anger could be terrible when it was aroused.
Sometimes greatly daring, I crept up the stairs and opened the door very quietly, very quickly, and peeped in.
Every time I did so, his eyes were looking straight at me.

The cheetah may be a gorgeous, sleek sports car among mammals, able to sprint at speeds approaching Seventy miles an hour, yet it has not been able to run away from its many miseries.
Once the cat ranged throughout the African continent, the Near East, and into southern India; now it is extinct almost everywhere but in scattered patches of sub-Saharan Africa, Farmers in Iambi shoot cheetahs as Vermin.
On reserves, where cheetahs are often forced into unnatural proximity with other predators, they are at the bottom of the meat eaters' grim hierarchy; lions will go out of their way to destroy cheetah cubs, while hyenas, leopards, and even vultures can easily chase away a cheetah from its hard-caught prey.
To make the magnificent cats story more poignant still, many scientists have concluded that the species is severely inbred, the result of a disastrous population crash thousands of years ago from which the poor animals have hardly had a chance to recover.
Studies of cheetah chromosomes show a surprising Jack of genetic diversity from one individual to the next, and as a result the cheetah is widely portrayed as sitting under an evolutionary guillotine, the population so monochromatic that, in theory, a powerful epidemic could destroy many if not all of the approximately fifteen thousand cheetahs that currently exist in the wilderness.
Some zoos have complained that cheetahs are infertile, and they attribute the problem to the cheetahs bleak genetic makeup, calling into question the long-term prognosis even for cats living in the pampered confines of a park.
Now some maverick biologists argue that this widely held notion of the inbred cheetah may be wrong, an artifact of test tube manipulations with little relevance to the cats workaday world.
They insist that, far from displaying the negative effects of lethargy and feebleness seen in other animals known to be genetically homogeneous, cheetahs are in many ways quite robust.
The significance of the debate extends far beyond the cat itself.
Scientists are seeking to calculate the odds that any number of endangered or threatened species are likely to survive into the twenty-first century, and among the in any questions they ask is how much genetic diversity a creature requires if it is to rebound from the brink of extinction.
Inbreeding is thought to be harmful to a species for two reasons: first, it allows hazardous recessive traits to come to the fore, resulting in physical problems and, in some cases, infertility; and second, it leads to a genetically uniform population without the diversity to resist epidemics and environmental changes.
But the scientists who resist the inbred cheetah dogma point out that many zoo cats bear healthy cubs, are perfectly fertile and vigorous, and have great variation in their immune systems.
While the cheetah may look genetically tenuous when its DNA is appraised, by such real life measurements as litter size, cub health, and immune response, the cheetah is perfectly fit for the millennium.
The work of these scientists calls into question the validity of a strictly molecular approach to the sometimes murky Science of species preservation, and it strongly suggests that Scientists do not yet understand why certain genetic patterns detected in laboratory tests translate into the genuine strengths and weaknesses of a wild animal.
The work also indicates that zoos having trouble propagating cheetahs in captivity perhaps should not blame the animals DNA, but rather their own ineptitude at the science of animal breeding.
In the final analysis, the cheetahs long-term future very likely rests not on genetic research, but on old-fashioned remedies like preserving its remaining habitat and enlisting the help of those who live alongside it.
In Namibia, where the cheetah does not have to compete with many other carnivores, as it does elsewhere in Africa, the feline fares reasonably well, and its biggest problem is ranchers who shoot it in the belief that the cat threatens their livestock.
Biologists in Namibia are seeking to convince the cattle owners that cheetahs in fact kill very few livestock animals, and to establish a compensatory program should a calf occasionally be lost.
With its sizeable free-ranging population now confined to Namibia, the cheetah is being pitched as a uniquely Namibian cat and thus a source of national pride.
More than an ideal genetic profile, the cheetah needs a bit of panting room and all the public relations its noble bearing can buy.

As a scientist, I find that only one vision of this city really gets my hackles up -- the notion that a city is somehow "unnatural," a blemish on the face of nature.
The argument goes like this Cities remove human beings from their natural place into the world.
They are a manifestation of the urge to conquer nature rather than to live in harmony with it.
Therefore, we should abandon both our cities and our technologies and return to an earlier, happier state of existence, one that presumably would include any fewer human beings than now inhabit our planet.
There is an important hidden assumption behind this attitude, one that needs to be brought out and examined if only because it is so widely held today.
This is the assumption that nature, left to itself, will find a state of equilibrium (a balance of nature) and that the correct role for humanity is to find a way to fit into that balance.
If you think this way, you are likely to feel that all of human history since the Industrial (if not the Agricultural) Revolution represents a wrong turning a blind alley, something like the failed Soviet experiment in central planning.
Cities, and particularly the explosive postwar growth of Suburbs (urban sprawl), are agencies that destroy the balance of nature, and hence are evil presences on the planet.
What bothers me about this point of view is that it implies that human beings, in some deep sense, are not part of nature.
Nature,to many environmental thinkers, is what happens when there are no people around.
As soon as we show up and start building towns and cities, nature stops and something infinitely less worthwhile starts.
It seems to me that we should begin our discussion of cities by recognizing that they aren't unnatural, any more than beaver dams or anthills are unnatural.
Beavers, ants, and human beings are all part of the web of life that exists on our planet.
As part of their survival dtrategy, they alter their environments and build shelters.
There is nothing unnatural about this.
Nor is there anything unnatural about downtown areas.
Yes, in the town the soil has been almost completely covered by concrete, buildings, and asphalt; often there is no grass or undisturbed soil to be seen anywhere.
But this isn't really unnatural.
There are plenty of places in nature where there is no soil at all, think of cliffsides in the mountains or along the ocean.
From our point of view, the building of Manhattan simply amounted to the exchange a forest for a cliffside ecosystem.
Look at the energy sources of the downtown ecosystem.
There is, of course, sunlight to provide warmth.
In addition, there is a large amount of human made detritus that can serve as food for animals: hamburger buns, apple cores, and partially filled soft drink containers.
All of these can and do serve as food sources.
Indeed, urban yellow jackets search to find sugar rich soft drink cans excellent source of nectar for their honey - just notice them swarming around waste containers during the summer.
A glimpse of downtown, in fact, illustrates that the city can be thought of as a natural on at least three different levels.
At the most obvious level, although we dont normally think in these terms, a city is an ecosystem, much as a salt marsh or a forest is.
A city operates in pretty much the same way as any other ecosystem, with its own peculiar collection of flora and fauna.
This way of looking at cities has recently received the ultimate academic accolade -- the creation of a subfield of science, called urban ecology, devoted to understanding it, At a somewhat deeper level, a natural ecosystem like a forest is a powerful metaphor to aid in understanding how cities work.
Both systems grow and evolve, and both require a larger environment to supply them with materials and to act as a receptacle for waste.
Both require energy from outside sources to keep them functioning, and both have a life cyclebirth, maturity, and death.
Finally, our cities are like every other natural system in that, at bottom, they operate according to a few well-defined laws of nature.
There is, for exampe, a limit to how high a tree can grow, set by several factors including the kinds of forces that exist between atoms in wood.
There is also a limit to how high a wood (or stone or steel) building can be built -- a limit that is influenced by those same interatomic forces.
So let me state this explicitly: A city is a natural system, and we can study it in the same way we study other natural systems and how they got to be the way they are.

Why is the Mona Lisa the best-known painting in the entire world? A small glimpse at even some of its subjects features -- her eyes, or perhaps just her hands -- brings instant recognition even to those who have no taste or passion for painting.
Art historians, poets, and admirers have tried to explain the commanding place that the Mona Lisa has in our cultural life with reference to qualities intrinsic to the work.
There is something, they argue, inside the painting that speaks to us all, that unleashes feelings, emotion, and recognition.
This idea originated at the beginning of the nineteenth century, though it had precedents.
It is still the position of many art critics.
Art historian Kenneth Clarke, for example, writing in 1973, could not accept that the Mona Lisa was famous for reasons other than its inner qualities.
There are millions of people, he explained, who know the name of only one picture -- the Mona Lisa.
This, he argues, is not simply due to an accident of accumulated publicity.
It means that this strange image strikes at the subconscious with a force that is extremely rare in an individual work of art.
Clarke's conception of art history is now regarded as somewhat old-fashioned.
This is not the case with the "postmodern" Paul Barolsky, who in 1994, seeking to explain what it is about the Mona Lisa that "holds us in thrall,"" pointed to Leonardo's remarkable technique, which creates a sense of texture and depth.
The painter, he added, yendered the "inwardness of the sitter, the sense... of her mind or soul.”
I think one should avoid succumbing to the charm of a myth, to the idea that inside every masterpiece that has remained alive for centuries something imponderable speaks to us.
It is of course intensely pleasurable to imagine that, as we face the products of Leonardo, Raphael, and other great artists of bygone ages, armed with nothing but our innate sensibility, a mysterious yet almost palpable contact is established.
But like most historians, start with the assumption that the renown of a masterpiece rests on a sequence of events and historical agencies (people, institutions, processes) working in a largely unplanned manner for different ends.
Such forces have turned the Mona Lisa into the best-known painting in the world. Whether the Mona Lisa deserves this position is a judgment I happily leave to the reader.

It unrolled slowly, focused to show its colors, curling and snapping back whenever one of us turned loose.
The whole land was very tense until we put our four steins on its corners and laid the river out to run for us through the mountains 150 miles north.
Lewis' hand took a pencil and marked out a small strong X in a place where some of the green bled away and the paper changed with the high ground, and began to work downstream, northeast to southwest through the printed woods.
I watched the hand rather than the location, for it seemed to have power over the terrain, and when it stopped for Lewis' voice to explain something, it was as though all streams everywhere quit running, hanging silently where they were to let the point be made.
The pencil turned over and pretended to sketch in with the eraser an area that must have been around fifty miles long, through which the river hooked and cramped.
"When they take another survey and rework the map," Lewis said, "all this in here will be blue. The dam at Aintry has already been started, and when it is finished next spring the river will back up fast. This whole valley will be under water. But right now it is wild. And I mean wild; it looks like something up in Alaska. We really ought to go up there before the real estate people get hold of it and make it over into one of their heavens."
I leaned forward and concentrated down into the invisible shape he had drawn, trying to see the changes that would come, the nighttime rising of dammed water brining a new lake up with its choice lots, its marinas and beer cans, and also trying to visualize the land as Lewis said it was at that moment, unvisited and free.
I breathed in and out once, consciously; my body, particularly the back and arms, felt ready for something like this.
I looked around the bar and then back into the map, picking up the river where we would enter it.
A little way to the southwest the paper bleached.
"Does this mean it is higher here?"
I asked.
"Yes," Lewis said, looking quickly at me to see if I saw he was being tolerant.
Ah, he's going to turn this into something, I thought.
A lesson.
A moral.
A life principle.
A Way.
"It must run through a gorge or something" was all he said though.
"But we can get through that in a day, easy. And the water should be good, in that part especially."
I didn't have much idea what good meant in the way of river water, but for it to seem good to Lewis it would have to meet some very definite standards.
The way he went about things was strictly his own; that was mainly what he liked about doing them.
He liked particularly to take some extremely specialized and difficult form of sport -- usually one he could do by himself -- and evolve a personal approach to it which he could then expound.
I had been through this with him in fly casting, in archery and weight lifting and spelunking, in all of which he had developed complete mystiques.
Now it was canoeing.
I settled back and came out of the map.
Bobby Trippe was there, across from me.
He had smooth thin hair and a high pink complexion.
I knew him least well of the others at the table, but I liked him a  good deal, even so.
He was pleasantly cynical and gave me the impression that he shared some kind of understanding with me that neither of us was to take Lewis too seriously.
"They tell me that this is the kind of thing that gets hold of middle-class householders every once in a while", Bobby said. "But most of them just like down till the feeling passes."
"And when most of them lie down they're at a cemetery before they think about getting up," Lewis said.

New York was darker than I expected, and, in spite of the cleansing rain, dirtier.
Used to teh sensual curves of Puerto Rico, my eyes had to adjust to the regular, aggressive two-dimensionality of Brooklyn.
Raindrops pounded the hard streets, captured the dim silver flow of street lamps, bounced against sidewalks in glistening sparks, then disappeared like tiny ephemeral jewels, into the darkness.
Mother and grandmother teased that I was disillusioned because the streets were not paved with gold.
But I had no such vision of New York.
I was disappointed by the darkness and fixed my hopes on the promise of light deep within the sparkling raindrops.
Two days later, I leaneda gainst the wall of our apartment building on McKibbin Street wondering where New York ended and the rest of the world began.
It was hard to tell.
There was no horizon in Brooklyn.
Everwhere I looked, my eyes met a vertical maze of gray and brown straight-edged buildings with sharp corners and deep shadows.
Every few blocks there was a cement playground surrounded by chain-link fence.
And in between, weedy lots mounded with garbage and rusting cars.
A girl came out of the building next door, a jump rope in her hand.
She appraised me shyly; I pretended to ignore her.
She teppoed on the rop, stretching the ends overhead as if to measure their length, and then began to skip, slowly, grunting each time she came down on the sidewalk.
Swich splat gruns wish, she turned her back to me; swish splat grunt swish, she faced me again and smiled.
I smiled back, and she hopped over.
"Tu eres hispana?" she asked, as she whirled the rope in lazy arcs.
No, I am Puerto Rican."
"Same thing. Puerto Rican, Hispanic. That is what we are here."
She skipped a tight circle, stopped abruptly, and shoved the rope in my direction.
"Want a turn?"
"Sure."
I hopped on one leg, then the other.
"So, if you are Puerto Rican, they call you Hispanic?"
"Yeah. Anybody who speaks Spanish."
I jumped a circle, as she had done, but faster.
"You mean, if you speak Spanish, you are Hispanic?"
"Well, yeah. No... I mean your parents have to be Puerto Rican or Cuban or something."
I whirled the rope to the right, then the left, like a boxer.
"Okay, your parents are Cuban, let's say and you're born here, but you don't speak Spanish. Are you Hispanic?"
She bit her lower lip.
"I guess so," she finally said.
"It has to do with being from a Spanish country. I mean, you or your parents, like, even if you don't speak Spanish, you're Hispanic, you know?"
She looked at me uncertainly.
I nodded and returned her rope.
But I didn't know.
I'd always been Ouerto Rican, and it hadn't ocurred to me that in Brooklyn I'd be someone else.
Later, I asked, "Are we Hispanics, Mother?"
"Yes, because we speak Spanish."
"But a girl said you don't have to speak the language to be Hispanic."
She scrunchered her eyes.
"What girl? Where did you meet a girl?"
"Outside. She lives in the next building."
"Who said you could go out to the sidewalk? This isn't Puerto Rico. Algo te puede suceder."
"Something could happen to you" was a variety of dangers outside the locked doors of our apartment.
I listened to mother's lecture with downcast eyes and the necessary, respectful expression of humility.
But inside, I quaked.
Tow days in New York, and I'd already become someone else.
It wasn't hard to imagine greater dangers lay ahead.

I have found the effect of comic books to be first of all anti-educational.
They interfere with education in the larger sense.
For children, education is not merely a question of learning, but is a part of mental health.
They do not "learn " online in school; they learn also during play, from entertainment, and in social life with adults and with other children.
To take large chunks of time out of a child's life -- time during which he or she is not positively, that is, educationally, occupied -- means to interfere with healthful mental growth.
To make a sharp distinction between entertainment and learning is poor pedagogy, and even worse psychology.
A great deal of learning comes in the form of entertainment, and a great deal of entertainment painlessly teaches important things.
By no stretch of critical standards can the text in comics qualify as literature, or the drawings as art.
Children spend an enormous amount of time on comic books, but their gain is nil.
They do not learn how to read a serious book or magazine.
They do not gain a true picture of the West from the "Westerns".
They do not learn about any normal aspects of sex, love, or life.
I have known many adults who have treasured throughout their lives some of the books they read as children.
I have never came across any adult or adolescent who had outgrown comic book reading who would ever dream of keeping any of these "books" for any sentimental or other reason.
In other words, children spend a large amount of their time and money on these publications and have nothing positive to show for it.
And since almost all good children's reading has some educational value, comics by their very nature are not only non-educational; they are anti-educational.
They fail to teach anything that might be useful to a child; they do suggest many things that are harmful.

Surprisingly, there are old comic book fans, a small army of them: adults wearing school ties and tweeds, teaching in universities, writing ad copy, writing for chic magazines, writing novels -- who continue to be addicts, who save old comic books, buy them, trade them, who publish mimeographed "fanzines," strange little publications deifying what is looked back on as "the golden age of comic books". Ruined by growing up.
The charges against comic books in the 1950's -- that they were participating factors in juvenile delinquency, that they were, in general, a corrupting influence, glorifying crime and depravity -- can only, in all fairness, be answered: "But of course. Why else read them?"
Comic books, first of all, are junk.
To accuse them of being what they are is to make no accusation at all: there is no such thing as uncorrupt junk or moral junk or educational junk -- though attempts at the latter have, from time to time, been foisted upon us.
But education is not the purpose of junk (which is one reason why half-hearted attempts to bring reality or literature to comic books invariably look embarrassing.)
Junk is there to entertain on the basest, most compromised of levels.
It finds the lowest common denominator and proceeds from there.
A good many readers, when challenged, will say defiantly: "I know it's junk but I like it."
Which is the whole point about junk.
It is there to be nothing else but liked.
Junk is a second-class citizen of the arts, a status of which we and it are constantly aware.
There are certain privileges inherent in second-class citizenship.
Irresponsibility is one.
Not being taken seriously is another.
Junk can get away with doing or saying anything because, by its very appearance, it is already in disgrace.
What critics of comic books dismiss is the more positive side of junk, their underground antisocial influence.
Children are bombarded with hard work, labeled education.
They rise at the same time or earlier than their parents, start work without office chatter, go till noon without coffee breaks, have waxed milk for lunch, then back at the desk until three o'clock.
And always at someone else's convenience.
It should come as no surprise, then, that within this shifting hodgepodge of external pressures, children, simply to stay sane, must go underground.
Have a place to hide where they cannot be got at by grownups.
A relief zone.
And the basic sustenance for this relieve was, in my day, comic books.
With them we were able to roam free, disguised in costume, committing the greatest of feats -- and the worst of sins.
And, in every instance, getting away with them.
For a little while, at least, it was our show.
For a little while, at least, we were the bosses.
Psychically renewed, we could then return aboveground and put up with another couple of days of victimization.

After 50 years of life and 20 years of death, the great Adler and Sullivan Auditorium in Chicago is back in business again.
Orchestra Hall, also in Chicago, was beautifully spruced up for its sixty-eighth birthday.
In St. Louis, a 1925 movie palace has been successfully transformed into Powell Symphony Hall, complete with handsome bar from New Yorks demolished Metropolitan Орега Ноuse.
Sentimentalism? Hardly.
This is no more than a practical coming of cultural age, a belated recognition that fine old buildings frequently offer the most for the money in an assortment of values, including cost, and above all, that new cultural centers do not a culture make.
It indicates the dawning of certain sensibilities, perspectives, and standards without which arts programs are mockeries of everything the arts stand for.
The last decade has seen city after city rush pell-mell into the promotion of great gobs of cultural real estate.
It has seen a few good new theaters and a lot of bad ones, temples to bourgeois muses with all the panache of suburban shopping centers.
The practice has been to treat the arts in chamber-of-commerce, rather than in creative, terms.
That is just as tragic as it sounds.
The trend toward preservation is significant not only because it is saving and restoring some superior buildings that are testimonials to the creative achievements of other times, but also because it is bucking the conventional wisdom of the conventional power structure that provides the backing for conventional cultural centers to house the arts.
That wisdom, as it comes true blue from the hearts and minds of real estate dealers and investment bankers, is that you don't keep old buildings; they are obsolete.
Anything new is better than anything old and anything big is better than anything small, and if a few cultural values are lost along the way, it is not too large a price to pay.
In addition, the new, big buildings must be all in one place so they will show.
They’ll not only serve the arts, they’ll improve the surrounding property values.
Build now, and fill them later, At the same time, tear down the past, rip out cultural roots, erase tradition, rub out the architectural evidence that the arts flowered earlier in our cities and enriched them and that this enrichment is culture.
Substitute a safe and sanitary status symbol for the loss, Put up the shiny mediocrities of the present and demolish the shabby masterpieces of the past.
That is the ironic other side of the “cultural explosion” coin.
In drama, and in life, irony and tragedy go hand in hand.
Chicago’s Auditorium is such a masterpiece.
With its glowing, golden ambiance, its soaring arches and super-stage from which whispers can be heard in the far reaches of the theater, it became a legend in its own time.
One of the great nineteenth-century works of Louis Sullivan and Dankmar Adler and an anchor point of modern architectural history, it has been an acknowledged model of acoustical and aesthetic excellence.
(Interestingly, the Auditorium is a hard theater in which to install microphones today, and many modern performers, untrained in balance and projection and reliant on technical mixing of sound, find it hard to function in a near-perfect house.) Until October 1967, the last performance at the Auditorium was of Hellzapoppinin’ in 1941, and the last use of the great stage was for bowling alleys during the Second World War.
Closed after that, it settled into decay for the next 20 years, Falling plaster filled the hall, and the golden ceiling was partly ruined by broken roof drains, Last fall the Auditorium reopened, not quite in its old glory, but close to it.
The splendors of the house were traced in the eight-candlepower glory of carbon-filament lightbulbs of the same kind used in 1889 when the theater, and electricity, were new.
Their gentle brilliance picked out restored architectural features in warm gilt and umber.
We have never had greater technical means or expertise to make our landmarks bloom.
The question is no longer whether we can bring old theaters back to new brilliance, but whether we can fill them when they’re done.
As with the new centers, that will be the acid cultural test.

There is considerable evidence that irrigation may have played a pivotal role in the foundation of the earliest civilizations, such as that of Sumer in the Tigris-Euphrates valley.
The reasons for the influence of irrigation are twofold.
The development of irrigation allowed for extremely efficient agricultural production, creating the surplus of food resources that must serve as the foundation for any civilization.
Furthermore, constructing the elaborate system of canals and drainage networks was a task of tremendous complexity.
The centers of commerce, administration, and science that accomplished the task eventually blossomed into the cities that served as the cornerstone of Sumerian civilization.

The city of Havana stands today as a testament to its turbulent yet glorious history.
This lively center of all things Cuban looks today as much as it did when it was built more than 100 years ago.
An air of distinction and wealth, albeit now somewhat faded, lingers in its neighborhoods.
Spanish architecture, a symbol of a colonial past, graces the city, though the paint and plaster of many of the buildings have chipped and peeled as the years have passed.
Amidst the gentle aging of this great city, it is the generosity and friendliness of the residents that have allowed Havana to survive and flourish.

What plagues both political parties in the United States today is their need to win over the voting public at any cost.
Since the average American voter has only an acquaintance with the crucial issues of the day and an even narrower grasp of the ways in which policy can address them, politicians are forced to mount often-vicious attacks on their competitors to capture the interest of the electorate.
Rather than elect the best candidates for the task at hand, the American voter, election after election, chooses what appears to be the lesser of multiple evils, electing, in effect, the best worst candidate for the job.

The pioneers of the teaching of science imagined that its introduction into education would remove the conventionality, artificiality, and backward-lookingness which were characteristic of classical studies, but they were gravely disappointed. 
So, too, in their time had the humanists thought that the study of the classical authors in the original would banish at once the dull pedantry and superstition of mediaeval scholasticism.
The professional schoolmaster was a match for both of them, and has almost managed to make the understanding of chemical reactions as dull and as dogmatic an affair as the reading of Virgil's Aeneid.
The chief claim for the use of science in education is that it teaches a child something about the actual universe in which he is living, in making him acquainted with the results of scientific discovery, and at the same time teaches him how to think logically and inductively by studying scientific method.
A certain limited success has been reached in the first of these aims, but practically none at all in the second.
Those privileged members of the community who have been through a secondary or public school education may be expected to know something about the elementary physics and chemistry of a hundred years ago, but they probably know hardly more than any bright boy can pick up from an interest in wireless or scientific hobbies out of school hours.
As to the learning of scientific method, the whole thing is palpably a farce.
Actually, for the convenience of teachers and the requirements of the examination system, it is necessary that the pupils not only do not learn scientific method but learn precisely the reverse, that is, to believe exactly what they are told and to reproduce it when asked, whether it seems nonsense to them or not.
The way in which educated people respond to such quackeries as spiritualism or astrology, not to say more dangerous ones such as racial theories or currency myths, shows that fifty years of education in the method of science in Britain or Germany has produced no visible effect whatever.
The only way of learning the method of science is the long and bitter way of personal experience, and, until the educational or social systems are altered to make this possible, the best we can expect is the production of a minority of people who are able to acquire some of the techniques of science and a still smaller minority who are able to use and develop them.

As I sat in my car, eating a cheeseburger and fries, I suddenly found it difficult to fathom the chain of events that had led me to this point, since the project that became so complex and multifaceted had once seemed so simple and straightforward.
I had set out to write a book about food.
I had long known that human beings, due to their omnivorous nature, have a complicated relationship with food.
For a cow, the decision of what to have for lunch is a simple one: if it's grass, it must be good to eat.
But for humans (and other omnivores), an enormous amount of time and effort must be expended on deciding exactly what to eat.
People have always relied on their powers of cognition and memory to steer them away from foods that are harmful or unpleasant, and toward foods that are nourishing and enjoyable.
In fact, some anthropologists theorize that the reason humans originally developed such large and complex brains was to help solve the riddle of what to have for lunch.
I decided that pondering this seemingly simple question would be the best way to being my inquiring into our relationship with food.
My original plan was to follow the paths of several food chains, from beginning to end: from farm or ranch to dinner table.
Since American cuisine is so commonly associated with fast food, I started by attempting to trace the ingredients that make up a typical fast food meal, from their presumably pastoral points of origin to their final destination as a cheeseburger and fries, consumed while I drove down the freeway.
I was attracted to this particular plan for its variety and for its extremes.
In the same way that following a river from alpine peak to desert floor exposes the traveler to every conceivable climate, I assumed that racing these routes would afford me a glimpse of all the myriad sources of our food.
What I didn't realize was that following these paths would be more complex than I had ever imagined.
The complexity arose, at least in part, from the sheer magnitude of the task.
In retrospect, I should have known that racing the precise route of any single food item was about as realistic as following the route of a glass of water after it's been poured into a stream.
Eventually, I realized that the only way to surmount this difficulty was to follow the stream itself rather than what was floating in it: to follow "potatoes" rather than "this bag of potatoes."
Unfortunately, this took care of only part of my problem.
The greater difficulty arose not from the stream itself, but from all the tributaries, inlets, and channels that crisscrossed or diverged from my chosen path.
I had believed that the particular stream I was following existed in splendid isolation, while in reality it was hopelessly intertwined with all sorts of other streams, in such a way that it was often impossible to tell where one left off and another began.
There was no way to consider the stream labeled "corn" for example, without taking into account the stream that was "industrial fertilizer production."
That stream in turn, was impossible to contemplate without a side trip down the tributary named "fossil fuels" and so on.
It didn't take many of these side trips to feel as if I'd lost sight of my original goal.
Looking back, I think I must have known all along that my plan wouldn't survive the journey in its original form.
Certainly, I always had an inkling that the production of food was just a small part of a much greater ecosystem, even if I hadn't consciously understood that pursuing the stream that represented agriculture would lead me onto so many other related pathways.
In the end, I cam to realize that no part of an ecosystem can be isolated and studied without consider the broad framework that supports it.

“Lucy Honeychurch has no faults,” said Cecil, with grave sincerity.
“I quite agree.
At present she has none.”
“At present?”
“I’m not cynical.
I’m only thinking of my pet theory about Miss Honeychurch.
Does it seem reasonable that she should play piano so wonderfully, and live so quietly?
I suspect that someday she shall be wonderful in both.
The water-tight compartments in her will break down, and music and life will mingle.
Then we shall have her heroically good, heroically bad—too heroic, perhaps, to be good or bad.”
Cecil found his companion interesting.
“And at present you think her not wonderful as far as life goes?”
“Well, I must say I’ve only seen her at Tunbridge Wells, where she was not wonderful, and at Florence.
She wasn’t wonderful in Florence either, but I kept on expecting that she would be.”
“In what way?”
Conversation had become agreeable to them, and they were pacing up and down the terrace.
“I could as easily tell you what tune she’ll play next.
There was simply the sense that she found wings and meant to use them.
I can show you a beautiful picture in my diary.
Miss Honeychurch as a kite, Miss Bartlett holding the string.
Picture number two: the string breaks.”
The sketch was in his diary, but it had been made afterwards, when he viewed things artistically.
At the time he had given surreptitious tugs to the string himself.
“But the string never broke?”
“No.
I mightn’t have seen Miss Honeychurch rise, but I should certainly have heard Miss Bartlett fall.”
“It has broken now,” said the young man in low, vibrating tones.
Immediately he realized that of all the conceited, ludicrous, contemptible ways of announcing an engagement this was the worst.
He cursed his love of metaphor; had he suggested that he was a star and that Lucy was soaring up to reach him?
“Broken? What do you mean?”
“I meant,” Cecil said stiffly, “that she is going to marry me.”
The clergyman was conscious of some bitter disappointment which he could not keep out of his voice.
“I am sorry; I must apologize.
I had no idea you were intimate with her, or I should never have talked
in this flippant, superficial way.
You ought to have stopped me.”
And down in the garden he saw Lucy herself; yes, he was disappointed.
Cecil, who naturally preferred congratulations to apologies, drew down the corner of his mouth.
Was this the reaction his action would get from the whole world?
Of course, he despised the world as a whole; every thoughtful man should; it is almost a test of refinement.
“I’m sorry I have given you a shock,” he said dryly.
“I fear that Lucy’s choice does not meet with your approval.” 

The ability of the “I Have a Dream” speech to highlight King’s early career at the expense of his later career accounts for the tone of impatience and betrayal that often appears when modern-day supporters of King’s agenda talk about the speech.
Former Georgia state legislator Julian Bond said in 1986 that commemorations of King seemed to “focus almost entirely on Martin Luther King the dreamer, not on Martin King the antiwar activist, not on Martin King the challenger of the economic order, not on Martin King
the opponent of apartheid, not on the complete Martin Luther King.”
One King scholar has proposed a ten-year moratorium on reading or listening to the “I Have a Dream” speech, in the hopes that America will then discover the rest of King’s legacy.
This proposal effectively concedes that King’s magnificent address cannot be recovered from the misuse and overquotation it has suffered since his death.
But it is not clear that this is so.
Even now, upon hearing the speech, one is struck by the many forms of King’s genius.
Many people can still remember the first time they heard “I Have a Dream,” and they tend to speak of that memory with the reverence reserved for a religious experience.
At the very least, reflecting on the “I Have a Dream” speech should be an opportunity to be grateful for the astonishing transformation of America that the freedom movement wrought.
In just under a decade, the civil rights movement brought down a system of segregation that stood essentially unaltered since Reconstruction.
King’s dreams of an America free from racial discrimination are still some distance away, but it is astounding how far the nation has come since that hot August day in 1963.
Segregation in the South has been dismantled; there are no longer “Whites Only” signs; segregationist governors do not try to prevent Black children from entering public schools.
Toward the end of his life, King preached a sermon entitled “Ingratitude,” in which he called ingratitude “one of the greatest of all sins,” because the sinner “fail[s] to realize his dependence on others.”
The annual Martin Luther King holiday is properly a day of national thanksgiving, a time for the nation to recognize the immense debt it owes to King and the thousands of heroes of the civil rights movement for saving the soul of America. 

Words have always held a particular power for me.
I remember leafing through a book of Native American poems one morning while I was waiting for my Shakespeare class to begin and being struck by a phrase from the preface, “The word, the word above all, is truly magical, not only by its meaning, but by its artful manipulation.”
This quote, which I added to my journal, reminded me of something my grandfather had told me when I was a girl: “If you say a word often enough it becomes your own.”
I added that phrase to my journal next to the quote about the magic of words.
When I traveled home to Baltimore for my grandfather’s funeral a year after my journal entry, I mentioned my grandfather’s words to my
father.
He corrected me.
He told me that my grandfather had actually said, “If you say a word often enough, it becomes you.”
I was still a student at the time, but I knew even then, even before I had made a conscious decision to teach as well as act, that my grandfather’s words would be important.
Actors are very impressionable people, or some would say, suggestible people.
We are trained to develop aspects of our memories that are more emotional and sensory than intellectual.
The general public often wonders how actors remember their lines.
What’s more remarkable to me is how actors remember, recall, and reiterate feelings and sensations.
The body has a memory just as the mind does.
The heart has a memory, just as the mind does.
The act of speech is a physical act.
It is powerful enough that it can create, with the rest of the body, a kind of cooperative dance.
That dance is a sketch of something that is inside a person, and not fully revealed by the words alone.
I came to realize that if I were able to record part of the dance—that is, the spoken part—and reenact it, the rest of the body would follow.
I could then create the illusion of being another person by reenacting something she had said as she had said it.
My grandfather’s idea led me to consider that the reenactment, or the reiteration, of a person’s words would also teach me about that person.
I had been trained in the tradition of acting called “psychological realism.”
A basic tenet of psychological realism is that characters live inside of you and that you create a lifelike portrayal of the character through a process of realizing your own similarity to the character.
When I later became a teacher of acting, I began to become more and more troubled by the self-oriented method.
I began to look for ways to engage my students in putting themselves
in other people’s shoes.
This went against the grain of the psychological realism tradition, which was to get the character to walk in the actor’s shoes.
It became less and less interesting intellectually to bring the dramatic literature of the world into a classroom of people in their late teens and twenties, and to explore it within the framework of their real lives.
Aesthetically it seemed limited, because most of the time the characters all sounded the same.
Most characters spoke somewhere inside the rhythmic range of the
students.
More troubling was that this method left an important bridge out of acting.
The spirit of acting is the travel from the self to the other.
This “self-based” method seemed to come to a spiritual halt.
It saw the self as the ultimate home of the character.
To me, the search for character is constantly in motion.
It is a quest that moves back and forth between the self and the other.
I needed evidence that you could find a character’s psychological reality by “inhabiting” that character’s words.
I needed evidence of the limitations of basing a character on a series of metaphors from an actor’s real life.
I wanted to develop an alternative to the self-based technique, a technique that would begin with the other and come to the self, a technique that would empower the other to find the actor rather than the other way around. 

By the time a child is six or seven she has all the essential avoidances well enough by heart to be trusted with the care of a younger child.
And she also develops a number of simple techniques.
She learns to weave firm square balls from palm leaves, to make pinwheels of palm leaves or frangipani blossoms, to climb a coconut tree by walking up the trunk on flexible little feet, to break open a coconut with one firm well-directed blow of a knife as long as she is tall, to play a number of group games and sing the songs which go with them, to tidy the house by picking up the litter on the stony floor, to bring water from the sea, to spread out the copra to dry and to help gather it in when rain threatens, to go to a neighboring house and bring back a lighted faggot for the chief's pipe or the cook-house fire.
But in the case of the little girls all these tasks are merely supplementary to the main business of baby-tending.
Very small boys also have some care of the younger children, but at eight or nine years of age they are usually relieved of it.
Whatever rough edges have not been smoothed off by this responsibility for younger children are worn off by their contact with older boys.
For little boys are admitted to interesting and important activities only so long as their behavior is circumspect and helpful.
Where small girls are brusquely pushed aside, small boys will be patiently tolerated and they become adept at making themselves useful.
The four or five little boys who all wish to assist at the important, business of helping a grown youth lasso reef eels, organize themselves into a highly efficient working team; one boy holds the bait, another holds an extra lasso, others poke eagerly about in holes in the reef looking for prey, while still another tucks the captured eels into his lavalava.
The small girls, burdened with heavy babies or the care of little staggerers who are too small to adventure on the reef, discouraged by the hostility of the small boys and the scorn of the older ones, have little opportunity for learning the more adventurous forms of work and play.
So while the little boys first undergo the chastening effects of baby-tending and then have many opportunities to learn effective cooperation under the supervision of older boys, the girls' education is less comprehensive.
They have a high standard of individual responsibility, but the community provides them with no lessons in cooperation with one another.
This is particularly apparent in the activities of young people: the boys organize quickly; the girls waste hours in bickering, innocent of any technique for quick and efficient cooperation.

Mr. Harding was not a happy man as he walked down the palace pathway, and stepped out into the close.
His position and pleasant house were a second time gone from him; but that he could endure.
He had been schooled and insulted by a man young enough to be his son; but that he could put up with.
He could even draw from the very injuries which had been inflicted on him some of that consolation which, we may believe, martyrs always receive from the injustice of their own sufferings.
He had admitted to his daughter that he wanted the comfort of his old home, and yet he could have returned to his lodgings in the High Street, if not with exultation, at least with satisfaction, had that been all.
But the venom of the chaplain's harangue had worked into his blood, and sapped the life of his sweet contentment.
'New men are carrying out new measures, and are carting away the useless rubbish of past centuries!'
What cruel words these had been- and how often are they now used with all the heartless cruelty of a Slope!
A man is sufficiently condemned if it can only be shown that either in politics or religion he does not belong to some new school established within the last score of years.
He may then regard himself as rubbish and expect to be carted away.
A man is nothing now unless he has within him a full appreciation of the new era; an era in which it would seem that neither honesty nor truth is very desirable, but in which success is the only touchstone of merit.
We must laugh at everything that is established.
Let the joke be ever so bad, ever so untrue to the real principles of joking; nevertheless we must laugh - or else beware the cart.
We must talk, think, and live up to the spirit of the times, or else we are nought.
New men and new measures, long credit and few scruples, great success or wonderful ruin, such are now the tastes of Englishmen who know how to live!
Alas, alas!
Under such circumstances Mr. Harding could not but feel that he was an Englishman who did not know how to live.
This new doctrine of Mr. Slope and the rubbish cart sadly disturbed his equanimity.
'The same thing is going on throughout the whole country!'
'Work is now required from every man who receives wages!'
And had he been living all his life receiving wages, and doing no work? Had he in truth so lived as to be now in his old age justly reckoned as rubbish fit only to be hidden away in some huge dust-hole? The school of men to whom he professes to belong, the Grantlys, the Gwynnes, are afflicted with no such self-accusations as these which troubled Mr. Harding.
They, as a rule, are as satisfied with the wisdom and propriety of their own conduct as can be any Mr. Slope, or any Bishop with his own.
But, unfortunately for himself, Mr. Harding had little of this self-reliance.
When he heard himself designated as rubbish by the Slopes of the world, he had no other resource than to make inquiry within his own bosom as to the truth of the designation.
Alas, alas! the evidence seemed generally to go against him.

A stout old lady was walking with her basket down the middle of a street in Petrograd to the great confusion of the traffic and with no small peril to herself.
It was pointed out to her that the pavement was the place for pedestrians, but she replied: 'I'm going to walk where I like. We've got liberty now.'
It did not occur to the dear old lady that if liberty entitled the pedestrian to walk down the middle of the road, then the end of such liberty would be universal chaos.
Everybody would be getting in everybody else's way and nobody would get anywhere.
Individual liberty would have become social anarchy.
There is a danger of the world getting liberty-drunk in these days like the old lady with the basket, and it is just as well to remind ourselves of what the rule of the road means.
It means that in order that the liberties of all may be preserved, the 
    liberties of everybody must be curtailed.
When the policeman, say, at Piccadilly Circus steps into the middle of the road and puts out his hand, he is the symbol not of tyranny, but of liberty.
You may not think so.
You may, being in a hurry, and seeing your car pulled up by this insolence of office, feel that your liberty has been outraged.
How dare this fellow interfere with your free use of the public highway? Then, if you are a reasonable person, you will reflect that if he did not interfere with you, he would interfere with no one, and the result would be that Piccadilly Circus would be a maelstrom that you would never cross at all.
You have submitted to a curtailment of private liberty in order that you may enjoy a social order which makes your liberty a reality.
Liberty is not a personal affair only, but a social contract.
It is an accommodation of interests.
In matters which do not touch anybody else's liberty, of course, I may be as free as I like.
If I choose to go down the road in a dressing-gown who shall say me nay? You have liberty to laugh at me, but I have liberty to be indifferent to you.
And if I have a fancy for dyeing my hair, or waxing my moustache (which heaven forbid), or wearing an overcoat and sandals, or going to bed late or getting up early, I shall follow my fancy and ask no man's permission.
I shall not inquire of you whether I may eat mustard with my mutton.
And you will not ask me whether you may follow this religion or that, whether you may prefer Ella Wheeler Wilcox to Wordsworth, or champagne to shandy.
In all these and a thousand other details you and I please ourselves and ask no one's leave.
We have a whole kingdom in which we rule alone, can do what we choose, be wise or ridiculous, harsh or easy, conventional or odd.
But directly we step out of that kingdom, our personal liberty of action becomes qualified by other people's liberty.
I might like to practice on the trombone from midnight till three in the morning.
If I went on to the top of Everest to do it, I could please myself, but if I do it in my bedroom my family will object, and if I do it out in the streets the neighbors will remind me that my liberty to blow the trombone must not interfere with their liberty to sleep in quiet.
There are a lot of people in the world, and I have to accommodate my liberty to their liberties.
We are all liable to forget this, and unfortunately we are much more conscious of the imperfections of others in this respect than of our own.
A reasonable consideration for the rights or feelings of others is the foundation of social conduct.
It is in the small matters of conduct, in the observance of the rule of the road, that we pass judgment upon ourselves, and declare that we are civilized or uncivilized.
The great moments of heroism and sacrifice are rare.
It is the little habits of commonplace intercourse that make up the great sum of life and sweeten or make bitter the journey.

I have yet to meet a poetry-lover under thirty who was not an introvert, or an introvert who was not unhappy in adolescence.
At school, particularly, maybe, if, as in my own case, it is a boarding school, he sees the extrovert successful, happy, and good and himself unpopular or neglected; and what is hardest to bear is not unpopularity, but the consciousness that it is deserved, that he is grubby and inferior and frightened and dull.
Knowing no other kind of society than the contingent, he imagines that this arrangement is part of the eternal scheme of things, that he is doomed to a life of failure and envy.
It is not till he grows up, till years later he runs across the heroes of his school days and finds them grown commonplace and sterile, that he realizes that the introvert is the lucky one, the best adapted to an industrial civilization the collective values of which are so infantile that he alone can grow, who has educated his fantasies and learned how to draw upon the resources of his inner life.
At the time, however, his adolescence is unpleasant enough.
Unable to imagine a society in which he would feel at home, he turns away from the human to the nonhuman: homesick he will seek, not his mother, but mountains or autumn woods, and the growing life within him will express itself in a devotion to music and thoughts upon mutability and death.
Art for him will be something infinitely precious, pessimistic, and hostile to life.
If it speaks of love it must be love frustrated, for all success seems to him noisy and vulgar; if it moralizes, it must counsel a stoic resignation, for the world he knows is well content with itself and will not change.
Deep as first love and wild with all regret,
O death in life, the days that are no more.
Now more than ever seems it sweet to die
To cease upon the midnight with no pain.
That to the adolescent is the authentic poetic note and whoever is the first in his life to strike it, whether Tennyson, Keats, Swinburne, Housman or another, awakens a passion of imitation and an affectation which no subsequent refinement or sophistication of his taste can entirely destroy.
In my own case it was Hardy in the summer of 1923; for more than a year I read no one else and I do not think that I was ever without one volume or another or the beautifully produced Wessex edition in my hands: I smuggled them into class, carried them about on Sunday walks, and took them up to the dormitory to read in the early morning,  though they were far too unwieldy to be read in bed with comfort.
In the autumn of 1924 there was a palace revolution after which he had to share his kingdom with Edward Thomas, until finally they were both defeated by Elliot at the battle of Oxford in 1926.
Besides serving as the archetype of the Poetic, Hardy was also an expression of the contemporary scene.
He was both my Keats and my Sandburg.
To begin with, he looked like my father: that broad unpampered moustache, bald forehead, and deeply lined sympathetic face belonged to that other world of feeling and sensation.
Here was a writer whose emotions, if sometimes monotonous and sentimental in expression, would be deeper and more faithful than my own, and whose attachment to the earth would be more secure and observant.

That large animals require a luxuriant vegetation, has been a general assumption which has passed from one work to another; but I do not hesitate to say that it is completely false, and that it has vitiated the reasoning of geologists on some points of great interest in the ancient history of the world.
The prejudice has probably been derived from India, and the Indian islands, where troops of elephants, noble forests, and impenetrable jungles, are associated together in every one's mind.
If, however, we refer to any work of travels through the southern parts of Africa, we shall find allusions in almost every page either to the desert character of the country, or to the numbers of large animals inhabiting it.
The same thing is rendered evident by the many engravings which have been published of various parts of the interior.
Dr. Andrew Smith, who has lately succeeded in passing the Tropic of Capricorn, informs me that, taking into consideration the whole of the southern part of Africa, there can be no doubt of its being a sterile country.
On the southern coasts there are some fine forests, but with these exceptions, the traveller may pass for days together through open plains, covered by a poor and scanty vegetation.
Now, if we look to the animals inhabiting these wide plains, we shall find their numbers extraordinarily great, and their bulk immense.
We must enumerate the elephant, three species of rhinoceros, the hippopotamus, the giraffe, the bos caffer, two zebras, two gnus, and several antelopes even larger than these latter animals.
It may be supposed that although the species are numerous, the individuals of each kind are few.
By the kindness of Dr. Smith, I am enabled to show that the case is very different.
He informs me, that in lat. 24', in one day's march with the bullock-wagons, he saw, without wandering to any great distance on either side, between one hundred and one hundred and fifty rhinoceroses - the same day he saw several herds of giraffes, amounting together to nearly a hundred.
At the distance of a little more than one hour's march from their place of encampment on the previous night, his party actually killed at one spot eight hippopotamuses, and saw many more.
In this same river there were likewise crocodiles.
Of course it was a case quite extraordinary, to see so many great animals crowded together, but it evidently proves that they must exist in great numbers.
Dr. Smith describes the country passed through that day, as 'being thinly covered with grass, and bushes about four feet high, and still more thinly with mimosa-trees.'
Besides these large animals, every one the least acquainted with the natural history of the Cape, has read of the herds of antelopes, which can be compared only with the flocks of migratory birds.
The numbers indeed of the lion, panther, and hyena, and the multitude of birds of prey, plainly speak of the abundance of the smaller quadrupeds: one evening seven lions were counted at the same time prowling round Dr. Smith's encampment.
As this able naturalist remarked to me, the carnage each day in Southern Africa must indeed he terrific!
I confess it is truly surprising how such a number of animals can find support in a country producing so little food.
The larger quadrupeds no doubt roam over wide tracts in search of it; and their food chiefly consists of underwood, which probably contains much nutriment in a small bulk.
Dr. Smith also informs me that the vegetation has a rapid growth; no sooner is a part consumed, than its place is supplied by a fresh stock.
There can be no doubt, however, that our ideas respecting the apparent amount of food necessary for the support of large quadrupeds are much exaggerated.
The belief that where large quadrupeds exist, the vegetation must necessarily be luxuriant, is the more remarkable, because the converse is far from true.
Mr. Burchell observed to me that when entering Brazil, nothing struck him more forcibly than the splendour of the South American vegetation contrasted with that of South Africa, together with the absence of all large quadrupeds.
In his Travels, he has suggested that the comparison of the respective weights (if there were sufficient data) of an equal number of the largest herbivorous quadrupeds of each country would be extremely curious.
If we take on the one side, the elephants hippopotamus, giraffe, bos caffer, elan,five species of rhinoceros; and on the American side, two tapirs, the guanaco, three deer, the vicuna, peccari, capybara (after which we must choose from the monkeys to complete the number), and then place these two groups alongside each other it is not easy to conceive ranks more disproportionate in size.
After the above facts, we are compelled to conclude, against anterior probability, that among the mammalia there exists no close relation between the bulk of the species, and the quantity of the vegetation, in the countries which they inhabit.

The Ring at Casterbridge was merely the local name of one of the finest Roman amphitheatres, if not the very finest remaining in Britain.
Casterbridge announced old Rome in every street, alley, and precinct.
It looked Roman, bespoke the art of Rome, concealed dead men of Rome.
It was impossible to dig more than a foot or two deep about the town fields and gardens without coming upon some tall soldier or other of the Empire, who had laid there in his silent unobtrusive rest for a space of fifteen hundred years.
He was mostly found lying on his side, in an oval scoop in the chalk, like a chicken in its shell; his knees drawn up to his chest; sometimes with the remains of his spear against his arm; a brooch of bronze on his breast or forehead; an urn at his knees, a jar at his throat, a bottle at his mouth; and mystified conjecture pouring down upon him from the eyes of Casterbridge street boys, who had turned a moment to gaze at the familiar spectacle as they passed by.
Imaginative inhabitants, who would have felt an unpleasantness at the discovery of a comparatively modern skeleton in their gardens, were quite unmoved by these hoary shapes.
They had lived so long ago, their time was so unlike the present, their hopes and motives were so widely removed from ours, that between them and the living there seemed to stretch a gulf too wide for even a spirit to pass.
The Amphitheatre was a huge circular enclosure, with a notch at opposite extremities of its diameter north and south.
It was to Casterbridge what the ruined Coliseum is to modern Rome, and was nearly of the same magnitude.
The dusk of evening was the proper hour at which a true impression of this suggestive place could he received.
Standing in the middle of the arena at that time there by degrees became apparent its real vastness, which a cursory view from the summit at noon-day was apt to obscure.
Melancholy, impressive, lonely, yet accessible from every part of the town, the historic circle was the frequent spot for appointments of a furtive kind.
Intrigues were arranged there; tentative meetings were there experimented after divisions and feuds.
But one kind of appointment - in itself the most common of any - seldom had place in the Amphitheatre: that of happy lovers.
Why, seeing that it was pre-eminently an airy, accessible, and sequestered spot for interviews, the cheerfullest form of those occurrences never took kindly to the soil of the ruin, would he a curious inquiry.
Perhaps it was because its associations had about them something sinister.
Its history proved that.
Apart from the sanguinary nature of the games originally played therein, such incidents attached to its past as these: that for scores of years the town-gallows had stood at one corner; that in 1705 a woman who had murdered her husband was half-strangled and then burnt there in the presence of ten thousand spectators. 
Tradition reports that at a certain stage of the burning her heart burst and leapt out of her body, to the terror of them all, and that not one of those ten thousand people ever cared particularly for hot roast after that.
In addition to these old tragedies, pugilistic encounters almost to the death had come off down to recent dates in that secluded arena, entirely invisible to the outside world save by climbing to the top of the enclosure, which few townspeople in the daily round of their lives ever took the trouble to do.
So that, though close to the turnpike-road, crimes might be perpetrated there unseen at mid-day.
Some boys had latterly tried to impart gaiety to the ruin by using the central arena as a cricket-ground.
But the game usually languished for the aforesaid reason - the dismal privacy which the earthen circle enforced, shutting out every appreciative passer's vision, every commendatory remark from outsiders - everything, except the sky; and to play at games in such circumstances was like acting to an empty house.
Possibly, too, the boys were timid, for some old people said that at certain moments in the summer time, in broad daylight, persons sitting with a book or dozing in the arena had, on lifting their eyes, beheld the slopes lined with a gazing legion of Hadrian's soldiery as if watching the gladiatorial combat; and had heard the roar of their excited voices; that the scene would remain but a moment, like a lightning flash, and then disappear.
Henchard had chosen this spot as being the safest from observation which he could think of for meeting his long-lost wife, and at the same time as one easily to be found by a stranger after nightfall.
As Mayor of the town, with a reputation to keep up, he could not invite her to come to his house till some definite course had been decided on.

Had Dr. Johnson written his own Life, in conformity with the opinion which he has given, that every man's life may be best written by himself; had he employed in the preservation of his own history, that clearness of narration and elegance of language in which he has embalmed so many eminent persons, the world would probably have had the most perfect example of biography that was ever exhibited.
But although he at different times, in a desultory manner, committed to writing many particulars of the progress of his mind and fortunes, he never had persevering diligence enough to form them into a regular composition.
Of these memorials a few have been preserved; but the greater part was consigned by him to the flames, a few days before his death.
As I had the honour and happiness of enjoying his friendship for upwards of twenty years; as I had the scheme of writing his life constantly in view; as he was well apprised of this circumstance, and from time to time obligingly satisfied my enquiries, by communicating to me the incidents of his early years; as I acquired a facility in recollecting, and was very assiduous in recording, his conversation, of which the extraordinary vigour and vivacity constituted one of the first features of his character; and as I have spared no pains in obtaining materials concerning him, from every quarter where I could discover that they were to be found, and have been favoured with the most liberal communications by his friends; I flatter myself that few biographers have entered upon such a work as this, with more advantages; independent of literary abilities, in which I am not vain enough to compare myself with some great names who have gone before me in this kind of writing.
Wherever narrative is necessary to explain, connect, and supply, I furnish it to the best of my abilities; but in the chronological series of Johnson's life, which I trace as distinctly as I can, year by year, I produce, wherever it is in my power, his own minutes, 
    letters, or conversation, being convinced that this mode is more lively, and will make my readers better acquainted with him, than even most of those were who actually knew him, but could know him only partially; whereas there is here an accumulation of intelligence from various points, by which his character is more fully understood and illustrated.
Indeed I cannot conceive a more perfect mode of writing any man's life, than not only relating all the most important events of it in their order, but interweaving what he privately wrote, and said, and thought; by which mankind are enabled as it were to see him alive, and to 'live over each scene' with him, as he actually advanced through the several stages of his life.
Had his other friends been as diligent and ardent as I was, he might have been almost entirely preserved.
As it is, I will venture to say that he will be seen in this work more completely than any man who has ever yet lived.
And he will be seen as he really was, for I profess to write, not his panegyric, which must be all praise, but his Life; which, great and good as he was, must not be supposed to be entirely perfect.
To be as he was, is indeed subject of panegyric enough to any man in this state of being; but in every picture there should be shade as well as light, and when I delineate him without reserve, I do what he himself recommended, both by his precept and his example: 'If the biographer writes from personal knowledge, and makes haste to gratify the public curiosity, there is danger lest his interest, his fear, his gratitude, or his tenderness, overpower his fidelity, and tempt him to conceal, if not to invent.
There are many who think it an act of piety to hide the faults or failings of their friends, even when they can no longer suffer by their detection; we therefore see whole ranks of characters adorned with uniform panegyric, and not to be known from one another but by extrinsic and casual circumstances.
If we owe regard to the memory of the dead, there is yet more respect to be paid to knowledge, to virtue, and to truth.'

Nobody ever wrote a dull autobiography.
If one may make such a bull, the very dullness would be interesting.
The autobiographer has two qualifications of supreme importance in all literary work.
He is writing about a topic in which he is keenly interested, and about a topic upon which he is the highest living authority.
It may he reckoned, too, as a special felicity that an autobiography, alone of all books, may be more valuable in proportion to the amount of misrepresentation which it contains.
We do not wonder when a man gives a false character to his neighbour, but it is always curious to see how a man contrives to present a false testimonial to himself.
It is pleasant to he admitted behind the scenes and trace the growth of that singular phantom which is the man's own shadow cast upon the coloured and distorting mists of memory.
Autobiography for these reasons is so generally interesting, that I have frequently thought with the admirable Benvenuto Cellini that it should be considered as a duty by all eminent men; and, indeed, by men not eminent.
As every sensible man is exhorted to make his will, he should also be bound to leave to his descendants some account of his experience of life.
The dullest of us would in spite of themselves say something profoundly interesting, if only by explaining how they came to be so dull--a circumstance which is sometimes in great need of explanation.
On reflection, however, we must admit that autobiography done under compulsion would he in danger of losing the essential charm of spontaneity.
The true autobiography is written by one who feels an irresistible longing for confidential expansion; who is forced by his innate constitution to unbosom himself to the public of the kind of matter generally reserved for our closest intimacy.

